
00: Hello, how are you.
11: Fine how are you?
00: How is the temperature in here not too bad.  I only put this radiator on about an hour ago and the room is...
11: Yes,
00: they are brilliant these old, Victorian things.  
11: How did Halloween go?
00: Oh very well, tonight there is erm... there is a ghost [0.46] is that what you mean? I thought you meant the children's things. Had  200 children here over the last week doing loads of you know making masks and it's been lovely.  Erm... tea, coffee...
11: I will have a coffee please.
00: I will just go and fill the water jug actually.
15: Morning
14: Morning
11: Good morning
15: Alright?
11: Yes think so. 
15: Good.
11: Could do with a quick fast forward to spring.
14:  Yes, nice
15: We are not doing too bad though are we really?
11: Not really, 
14: No we have had quite a mild October really, I mean it hasn’t been...
11: Yes, but the mild wet, you are not quite sure. I start to prefer the bright cold.
12: Morning
11: Hello
12: I could hear the chatter so I knew it was in the right direction. 
15: Well I wouldn't have known to come here but then I met Helen on the way in.
12: I am out of breath.  
15: Yes I am a bit. Do you walk across the grass?
12: Yes
15: I think I must just have seen you, I didn’t know it was...
12: A short cut and I thought I will soon know if my boots  have got holes in, because my feet will be wet but I am alright.  How are you John, are you alright?
11: Yes I am fine thank you.
12: I am out of breath.  
15: Anybody else for a cuppa?
11: Jane has just gone to get water.  
12: Hope they are switched off.
11: The kettle is working isn’t it. How can she...
15: Maybe she needs more does she.
12: Yes those better be switched off. 
15: Yes. Anybody else?
12: No I came in here and I was out of breath.   
11: You didn't run here did you?
12: Well I was striding across to see the park, 
00: Yes striding down, yes. 
12: I was. Dear, by the time I arrived I could barely
15: Jane have you got a system there. 
00: Yes, that was John’s.
15: Anybody else.  You are going to have water. You want coffee Catherine?
12: No I will have tea please. This might seem a stupid question but would you like some books, I have some children's books.
00: Oh yes please.
12: I will bring them out.
00: Yes, yes. 
12: I have about three boxes so. I will bring them one time when I drive. Because when I spoke to my brother last night, and he always says do you enjoy it and I said yes, he said well, he said carry them across the field. And I said, there are three...
00: Three boxes full. No.
12: Oh I said I am going to do it in one stint when I can bring the car out. 
00: yes. 
12: I thought he is not er...
00: There is always someone here on Wednesdays from 4 - 5, there is like a drop-in hour
12: I might yes, that 
00: if you want to do it then. 
12: Or I might do
00: But if you were coming here...
12: That is what I was thinking.
00: Yes. Oh I see yes.
15: That was for you Catherine, I don't know how strong you like it so...[talk over]
00: Ok so what was today's reading. 
15: Did I miss something from last week or is it continual...
00: No what did we do last week let’s...
11: I am and the little dancers
00: yes and the little dancers so we just read two poems last week. And...
15: Oh right ok. I wasn't sure if you had started an actual book.
00: No we are doing, now Grace can you remember is it Great Expectations for today?
17: No it's the Nathaniel Hawthorne
00: Oh yes the Nathaniel Hawthorne!
12: It was enjoyable last week.
14: It was good.
15: Was that your coffee John? Was that for you? Jane thought it was.
14: It was dark coming out though wasn't it?
12: Well, we went to the meeting last night, and I said to Helen, I said if you are going out now we will walk together and you said no, no I will be alright...
14: I would have come with you if I had realised. 
00: It’s dark!
14: I ended up waiting for Ro and George and 
12: Funnily enough I sort of strolled and thought oh it is dark, and then a chap walking his dog said, oh you are on your own and I thought quicken your pace here.  
14: Yes, yes
00: We have put into the council to erm... ask them to put some lighting here.   So erm.. but also I think we should have a big bowl of cheap torches that would help wouldn't it, just to say to people bring it back if you remember.  I also think we need that for umbrellas actually I was thinking we should get some Calderstones umbrellas and then because I keep showing people out who come to visit me in the pouring... and I think they have got quite a long walk to their car.
15: Yes you could have a point at the car park...
00: Yes just put them in that's a good idea.  A drop-off. Now sorry can't remember your name.
15: Maureen.
00: right so last week we just read 2 poems and they were quite different one, the first one I am very erm... serious and deep and erm... took us to some quite hard places and then we read the Little Dancers which was just a lovely little sketch of two little girls dancing in an alley way and erm... very, very different wasn't it??Hmm
00: So I thought this week we would read a sort story and it begins on page 151, and called David Swan by Nathaniel Hawthorne. So I have chosen things for each of the weeks as we are reading that might open up sort of areas of erm... having  a life, what's it like having life, erm... and so this is why it's almost like a children's story in a strange way or a myth. Hello... come on in. Welcome. Can I get you something would you like a cuppa.
13: Coffee would be lovely.
00: I am going to try to do my memory test now, erm... John, Catherine, Mary...  stop, stop... can't remember.
13: Angela
00: Ok sorry Angela.  Very sorry. Helen I can remember you because you look like Lizzy, so that is ok and Maureen.  Ok Angela, Angela you are my task for this week, I have imprinted you on my brain.  Do you want milk?
13: Yes please.
00: Angela.  And do you want sugar?
13: No thanks.
00: So I was just explaining to Maureen that we had erm... the two poems we read last week, that they were different and I am by John Clare was quite a hard poem for us to all read and explaining that I chosen things for the sessions that might take on the question of what is it like to have a life. Here we are in our lives, what is like to have one so... erm... I am was like jumping in the very deep end of a swimming pool wasn't it? Erm... but this is like holding a toddlers hand and going in at the other end, so here is the paths of our lives. David Swan by Nathaniel Hawthorne.
11: 151 wasn't it?
00: We can be but partially acquainted even with the events which actually influence the course, our course through life and our final destiny.  There are innumerable other events, if such they may be called, which come close upon us, yet pass away without actual results or even betraying their near approach by the reflection of any light or shadow across our minds.  Could we know all the vicissitudes of our fortunes, life would be too full of hope and fear, exaltation or disappointment to offer us a single hour of true serenity.  This idea maybe illustrated by a page from the secret history of David Swan. I am just going to stop there because I know that the erm... the language here is a little erm... complex so it might be worth just saying to each other, what is he saying in that first paragraph. What is it? We can be but partially acquainted even with the events which actually influence our course through life and our final destiny. So erm... I am just thinking what is an actual event, ok erm... erm... I met erm... my husband in 1982 and got married to him so that is an actual thing, can I fully understand the impact of that on m life? No, only quite almost roughly you can can't you but there will be hundreds of thousands of aspects of it that have never come into consciousness.  Erm... and our final destiny, there are innumerable other events if such they may be called which come close upon us yet pass away without actual results. Walking home through the park in the dark, erm... a mad dog might have been careering around, who could have bumped into you and bitten your leg, causing you to develop tetanus((laughs))Say... but luckily for you, he just ran behind the back of the toilets when you went past so you never knew that you nearly you know, that could have nearly happened to you. Erm... innumerable and in away when you stop to think about it, innumerable, almost just getting here this morning how many things could have nearly happened, erm... which come close upon us yet pass away without action or results. Or even be trying their near approach by the reflection of any light or shadow across our minds, could we know all of the vicissitudes of our fortunes, life, would be too full of hope and fear and exaltation or disappointment to afford us a single hour of true serenity. This idea may be illustrated by a page from the secret history of David Swan and so we go on.  We have nothing to do with David until we find him at the age of 20 on the high road from his native place, the city of Boston, where his uncle a small dealer in the grocery line, was to take him behind the counter.  Be it enough to say that he was a native of New Hampshire borne of respectable parents, and had received an ordinary school education with a classic finish by year at Gilmanton Academy. After journeying on foot from sunrise to nearly noon on a summers day his weariness and the increasing heat determined him to sit down in the first convenient shade and await the coming up of the stage coach.  As if planted on purpose for him, there soon appeared a little tuft of maples with a delightful recess in the middle, in the midst and such a fresh bubbling spring that it seemed never to have sparkled for any wayfarer but David Swan.  Virgin or not he kissed it with his thirsty lips and then flung himself along the brink pillowing his head upon some shirts and a pair of pantaloons tied up in a striped cotton handkerchief.  The sunbeams could not reach him, the dust did not yet rise from the road after the heavy rain of yesterday and his grassy lair suited the young man better than a bed of down.  The spring murmured drowsily beside him, the branches waved dreamily across the blue sky over head and deep sleep per chance hiding dreams within its depths fell upon David Swan.  But we are to relate events which he did not dream.  I am just going to stop there just to make sure we are all together in it and to see whether anybody has got any thoughts about either David or the story so far or anything you want to notice about it?
13: Well it seems to place it at a particular point in time, the pantaloons tied up
00: yes in the striped hanky.
15: Stage coach yes.
00: Yes so he is a bit like a... looks a bit like a Dick Wittington kind of figure doesn't he and that young man out to start his life, erm... and slightly comic somehow, erm... the laying of the pantaloons, his head down, on his clothes there.  
15: Pick up on the maples and it being Boston.  
00: yes lovely colours at this time of year. Hello.  
16: Hello... I am alright are you. I am just going to the toilet obviously I am late and then I will be back up. 
00: fine ok great, see you in a mo... now what's that man's name?
15: David. It's David Swan.
00: Right I am going Maureen, Helen, David, Angela, Catherine, John. Ok got you all now. Erm...  I will carry on and then when he comes back we will fill him in.While he lay sound asleep in the shade, other people were wide awake and passed to and fro, a foot, on horseback, and in all sorts of vehicles along the sunny road by his bed chamber. Some looked neither to the right hand nor the left, and knew not that he was there.  Some merely glanced that way without admitted the slumberer among their busy thoughts.  Some laughs to see how soundly he slept and several whose hearts were brimming full of scorn ejected them venomous superfluity on David Swan.  A middle aged widow when nobody else was near thrust her head a little way into the recess, and vowed that the young fellow looked charming in his sleep.  A temperance lecturer saw him and wrought poor David into the texture of his evenings discourse as an awful instance of dead drunkenness by the roadside. But censure, praise, merriment, scorn, and indifference were all one, or rather all nothing to David Swan.    We are going to stop again just because erm... we may as well go slowly while we are waiting for David and erm... you said it sets it in a sort of particular kind of time but those people coming along the road who don't seem erm... you know if this was a film, erm... my feeling is it would be more like a cartoon than a costume drama.  They seem sort of almost like [19.08] a widow comes up, oh he looks nice, a temperance lecturer comes along and you drunken... but he is just a... he is just that man isn't he.
15: It is putting me in mind of a erm... a western town.
14: yes
15: ((laughs))
00: And I suppose, I don't know, does anybody know Nathaniel Hawthorne's dates I don't erm... I would say he is...
11: Mid 19th
00: Mid 19th century so presumably yes, it would be like that anyway wouldn't it, those you know the States has hardly developed at that point, erm... I was struck as I was reading by these people whose several whose hearts were brimming full of scorn, ejected their venomous superfluity on David Swan so that, if... if you were just having a quiet snooze somewhere, in private or say in the park here, on a little bench, people going by, some people would no doubt... come on in...
16: [20.14]
00: Cup of tea.
16: No thanks I am alright just carry on. Don't let me stop you.  
00: So we are on page 152.
16: Ok. Thanks very much.
00: Erm... if you did see somebody asleep in the park, erm... what do you think your main feeling would be if you had to walk past someone who  was on one of those benches asleep?
15: I suppose appearance comes into it and...
00: Yes so what do they look like. Hmm.  
11: It would seem odd behaviour. 
00: So you might be a bit cautious and nervous anyway just thinking
11: Yes
00: That is somebody asleep there.
11: I think so.
12: I don't think more appearance, mine would be more the time of year, if it was a summer's day or late evening I would think they somebody just enjoying the warmth.
11: Yes that would be...
12: whereas perhaps if it...
00: if it were now.
12: I would be concerned really
00: Yes you would be worried?
12: yes I would probably go up to him...
00: And say are you ok?
12: Yes but I think it would depend the season.
15: Of course if it was somebody now you would be concerned wouldn't you? I would find out if there was a problem there yes.
13: So it feels like it's not a neutral thing is it, it's kind of why is that happening and people are showing concern or compassion but the other is scorn for that person.
00: Look at him he is drunk...
13: yes.  And that happens in any time doesn't it, that happens.  That could happen outside.
00: There is something very vulnerable about someone who is asleep when  you are not asleep, isn't there. You know it's very nice when you see like babies and they are mainly who we see asleep I suppose, and you think oh they look lovely but if you... came in the room and your mom or your aunty or your sister was asleep there’s something I don't know it's just a bit of an  unusual situation.
13: And it's very vulnerable to be out in the open isn't it, not in a contained space if you are asleep in a room, that is different to being asleep...
00: So this guy is, he is on his way, he is on a journey, and erm... he is going to take up a job in his uncle's shop in Boston, but he is tired so he has just lay down in a clump of trees in the shade. Hot day, to have a sleep while he is waiting for the stage coach to come along and erm... so this is the top of 153.  He had slept only a few moments when a brown carriage drawn by a handsome pair of horses bowled easily along and was brought to a standstill nearly  in front of David's resting place.  A lynch pin had fallen out, and permitted one of the wheels to slide off, the damage was slight and occasioned merely a moment... momentary alarm to an elderly merchant and his wife who were returning to Boston in the carriage.  While the coachman and a servant were replacing the wheel the lady and gentleman sheltered themselves beneath the maple trees, and there espied the bubbling fountain.  And David Swan, asleep  beside it.  Impressed with the awe which the humblest sleeper usually sheds around him, the merchant trod as lightly as the gout would allow and his spouse took good heed not to rustle her silk gown lest David should start up all of a sudden. How soundly he sleeps whispered the old gentleman, from what a depth he draws that easy breath, such sleep as that, brought on without an opiate would be worth more to me than half my income, for it would suppose health and an untroubled mind.  And youth besides said the lady, healthy and quiet age does not sleep thus. Our slumber is no more like his than our wakefulness. The longer they looked the more did this elderly couple feel interested in the unknown youth to whom the wayside and the maple shade were as a secret chamber with the rich gloom of damask curtains brooding over him.   Perceiving that a stray sunbeam glimmered down upon his face the lady contrived to twist a branch aside so as to intercept it, and having done this little act of kindness she began to feel like a mother to him. Providence seems to have laid him here whispered she, to her husband and to have brought us hither to find him. After our disappointment in our cousin's son me thinks I can see a likeness to our departed Henry. Shall we waken him?  To what purpose said the merchant hesitating, we know nothing of the youth's character. Oh that open countenance replied his wife in the same hushed voice yet earnestly, this innocence sleep.  While these whispers were passing the sleepers heart did not throb, nor his breath become agitated nor his features betray the least token of interest yet fortune was bending over him just ready to let fall a burden of gold. The old merchant had lost his only son, and had no heir to his wealth except a distant relative whose con... whose conduct he was dissatisfied. In such cases people sometimes do stranger things than act the magician and awaken a young man to splendour who feel asleep in poverty.   Shall we not waken him repeated the lady persuasively. The coach is ready sir, said the servant behind them ((laughs)). Ok just going to stop there now. So here is his first chance, erm... so David before you came in the story starts with saying, something like erm... we don't know about all the things that nearly happen to us that would make a massive difference to our lives, erm... you know like, you might have, somebody might have dropped a £100 note in the car park, but because you parked in a particular part of that car park, you walked out on a different path and you didn't see it.  You would never know, so all those things that could have happened to you, so that is what he is saying this story is going to be about. So here they are, the rich merchant and his wife,  do you think it's true as the old gentleman and lady seemed to say at the beginning of that, that erm... you sleep differently when you are older, erm... so say when you are awake there is a big difference between a young person and an old person. Are there the same kind of difference when you are asleep? She says, and youth besides said the lady, healthy and quiet age does not sleep thus.  Our slumber is no more like his, than our wakefulness.  
13: yes there is a difference, you notice that by kind of young people they seem to be able to sleep.
00: To sleep very, very well.  Erm... certainly most teenagers, erm... not all because I would say my daughter was pretty much an insomniac, but most teenagers seem to be able to sleep until about 1 o'clock in the day if left to their own devices, don't they? But that would be very, very hard for say my mother-in-law who often doesn't go to sleep until midnight and is up again by 6 o'clock and she says as she gets older, and older you know she might sleep more often, erm... but she says she can't sleep with the same length of time. Does anybody have... is there any why that would be or physiological...
13: I think there are reasons I can't think... but I have read that, that there are reasons why...
00: Why we do that.
13: We do sleep less but also the implication is that the older you get perhaps the more troubled you are and...
00: Yes so you are carrying those with you, maybe whereas he is just completely sleeping literally like a baby flat out there at the side of the road ((laughs)).  Lucky fellow.  Erm... and anything else you would notice about what happened in that last little page? Anything you want to point out?
13: I found it quite touching that she has obviously or both, particularly the woman that they are seeing into it the likeness of their dead son.  
00: And she said, it says at the top of 154, erm... she twisted a branch so as to give him a bit of shade and having done this little act of kindness she began to feel like a mother to him.  Erm... strange sentence really because it's quite  a small thing to do to just put a bit of shade over somebody who is sleeping but is it though actually now I think of it? Erm... 
11: It's working with a kind of fairy tale logic isn't it, things happen in ways that are really quite sharply defined.  And the moving of the branch and then this sudden idea that she might... that she is like a mother to him.
14: I think it's almost as if she is kind of looking for someone to be a mother for.
11: Yes
14: And so doing even a tiny thing like that, makes her feel like...
00: Feel motherly. Yes. So she is bringing that with her really.  
13: she is seeing the slightest thing in him somehow and in less than half a page he has almost become her son and inheritor of their fortune, let's take him with us kind of thing.
11: Yes
13: And then almost it's gone again.
00: And interesting that the merchant who... she said shall we waken him, to what purpose said the merchant hesitating, we know nothing of the youth's character ((laughs)). 
15: She is far more optimistic.
11: Yes
15: She is thinking oh look what I have found here, I can have this...
00: yes this lovely young person.
13: Well she is very much more on emotion isn't it, he is being practical...
00: Sensible. So far from sort of being like the man who walks past £100 note in the car park this man is lying there with the possibility of enormous riches just about to happen.  And he has got no idea.  He knows nothing.   Shall we not waken him, repeated the lady persuasively. The coach is ready sir, said the servant and that's a bit like what you were saying John about fairy tale, just at that very moment, something else happens and the story moves along a notch.  Erm... the old couple started, reddened  and hurried away mutually wondering that they should ever have dreamed of doing anything so very ridiculous.  The merchant threw himself back in the carriage and occupied his man with... his mind with the plan of a magnificent asylum for unfortunate men of business.  Meanwhile David Swan enjoyed his nap.  The carriage could not have gone above a mile or two when  a pretty young girl came along, with a tripping pace which showed precisely how her little heart was dancing in her bosom.  Perhaps it was this kind of merry emotion that caused... is there any harm in saying it, her garter to slip its knot. Conscious that the silken girth... if silk it were, was relaxing it's hold, she turned aside in to the shelter of the maple trees and there found a young man asleep by the spring. Blushing as red as any rose that she should have intruded into a gentleman's bed chamber, and for such a purpose too, she was about to make her escape on tip-toe but there was peril near the sleeper. A monster of a bee had wandered overhead buzzz, buzzz, buzzzz  now among the leaves, now flashing through the strips of sunshine, now lost in the dark shade until finally he appeared to be settling on the eyelid of David Swan. The sting of a bee is sometimes deadly, as free hearted as she was innocent the girl attacked the intruder with her handkerchief, brushed him soundly and drove him from beneath the maple shade.  How sweet a picture, this good deep accomplished, with quickened breath and a deeper blush she stole a glance at the youthful stranger for whom she had been battling with a dragon the air.  He is handsome thought she and blushed redder yet, how could it be that no dream of bliss  grew so strong within him that shattered  by his very strength it should part asunder and allow him to perceive the girl among his phantoms. Why at least did no smile of welcome brighten upon his face, she has come the maid whose soul according to the old and beauty idea, had been severed from his own and whom in all his vague but passionate desires he yearned to meet.  Her, only could he love with a perfect love. Him only could she receive into the depths of her heart, and now her image was faintly blushing in the fountain by his side, should it pass away it's happy lustre would never gleam upon his life again.  How sound he sleeps, murmured the girl.  She departed but did not trip along the road, so lightly as when she came.  Just stop there for a minute.  Erm... how are you thinking, what do you think of that? Here she is with her garter slipping down.  Erm... the modern equivalent would have to be you know your knicker elastic had gone ((laughs)) and you have to go into this little... to try and fix it and that is when you find him, just when you are in the middle of it.  Erm... and there she found a young man asleep by the spring. Blushing as red as any rose that she should have intruded into a gentleman's bed chamber.  It's quite... for its period I mean if we are saying mid 19th century it's quite sexy really isn't it, it's allowing erm... you the reader to imagine this lovely young girl with her head full of thoughts presumably of young men she might meet and fall in love with.  Erm... and she thinks that maple grove is a bed chamber, erm... she was about to make her escape on tip toe but, monster of a bee, could have killed him.  And then finally erm... she stole a glance at the youthful stranger for whom she had been battling a dragon in the air, so she seems a very romantic young woman doesn't she full of erm... sense of here he is, he is my prince and I will you know I will fight this bee for him ((laughs)). But he is so, he is still completely unaware. He has got no idea that anything is happening he is just happily asleep.  What do you think about all that at the end with erm... at the bottom of 155 erm...really the tone of it, how could it be that no dream of bliss grew so strong within him that shattered by its very strength it should part asunder and allow him to perceive the girl among it's fountains, why at least did no smile of welcome brighten upon his face she was come, the maid whose soul according to the old and beautiful idea had been severed from his own and whom in all his vague but passionate desires he yearned to meet. Are you taking it seriously?
14: It's like really over the top for such a short meeting isn't it?  But it's almost like
00: ((laughs))
14: It is a kind of like extreme analogy or something for like people who might know you for longer, and feel that way but you never notice them, kind of thing.
11: That's right, this great playing with the idea of destiny isn't it? An ideal destiny, which is...
00: Here she is yes, the one who is for me... and it makes you think as you are reading, does it... it is almost suggesting it is almost as if anybody could almost fall in love with anybody it's so... it's not scorn exactly but, but laughter at that idea.
11: Yes
00: Do you know that idea and I can't remember where it comes from that, that erm... that a couple is originally one thing and that it's split into two, erm... a male and a female in the old idea, and so that is why one is searching for one's mate is that to make a union that is the whole thing again. Erm... she was come the maid whose soul according to the old and beautiful idea, had been severed from his own erm... her only could he love with a perfect love. True or false you know when he gets to Boston, erm... and starts working in the shop he could meet 10 girls who he could love that much couldn't he? Or at least it feels as if, the writer seems to think that.  
13: Could you feel it's almost like playing with the fairy tale idea, it's joking with it, isn't it?
00: yes it is.  And yet it is
11: And a little tongue in cheek, was being suggested, more than a little, actually at that point.
00: Yes almost sort of quite extreme really.  Erm... how sound he sleeps murmured the girl presumably somewhat disappointed that he doesn't wake up and immediately say my love... you have arrived, she departed but did not trip along the road so lightly as when she came.  Now this girl's father was a thriving country merchant, top of 56, now this girl's father was a thriving country merchant in the neighbourhood,  and happened at that identical time to be looking out for just such a young man as David Swan, had David formed a wayside acquaintance with the daughter, he would have become the father's clerk, and all else in natural succession.  So here again had good fortune, the best of fortunes stolen so near that her garments brushed against him and he knew nothing of the matter.  The girl was hardly out of sight when 2 men turned aside beneath the maple shade, both had dark faces set off by cloth caps, which were drawn down a slant over their brows, their dresses were shabby, had a certain smartness. These were  a couple of rascals who got their living by whatever the devil sent them and now in the interim of other business, had staked their joint profits on their next piece of villainy on a game of cards which was to be have been decided here under the trees. But finding David asleep by the spring one of the rogues whispered to his fellow, pss see the bundle under his head,  the other fellow villain nodded, winked and leered. I bet you a horn of brandy said the first, that the chap has either a pocket book or a snug little hoard of small change, stowed away amongst his shirts.  And if not, we shall find it in his pantaloons pocket. But how if he wakens said the other, his companion thrust aside his waistcoat and pointed to the handle of dirk and nodded. Dirk being a dagger.  So be it, muttered the second villain, they approached the unconscious David, and while one pointed the dagger towards his heart the other began to search the bundle beneath his head.  To their two faces grim, wrinkled and ghastly with guilt and fear bent over their victim looking horrible enough to be mistaken for fiends should he suddenly awake. Nay had the villains glanced aside into the spring even they would hardly have known themselves as reflected there.  But David Swan had never worn a more tranquil aspect, even when asleep on his mother's breast. I must take away the bundle whispered one, if he stirs I will strike muttered the other but at this moment, a dog scenting along the ground came in beneath the maple trees and gazes ultimately at each of these wicked men and then at the quiet sleeper.  He then lapped out of the fountain.  Pshh said one villain we can do nothing now, the dog's master must be close behind let's take a drink and be off said the other. So there you go ((laughs)) are you enjoying that, you looked as if you were.  
16: I love stories so honest to God... don't mind me when I laugh cause I just love...
00: No it's nice to see.  Erm... so it's classic isn't it, it's like as you say it is fairly tale it is you know, the sleeper, the passersby first one, now another, now the third, those patterns of old story telling erm... it's never 2 people it's always 3, isn't it you know those sorts of things.  But here they are these couple of bad uns, erm... they have a certain realism to them, it gets quite, I mean in the previous, I suppose perhaps in connection to how the girl seemed relatively sexy, how the old couple seemed  relatively emotionally needy, even though it may be like comic strip in one way there is something real about their, I don't know if it's their emotions or their needs or something.
11: Their plan of action is realistic isn't it?
00: Yes very, yes.  Erm... that moment where their two faces grim, wrinkled and ghastly with guilt and fear, bent over their victim, looking horrible enough to be mistaken for fiends.  Erm... that's, quite a serious kind of writing.  You could have left out, for example, that you could have said their two faces erm... you know grim, wrinkled, ghastly with guilt and fear that's psychologically very astute and noticing even though at the same time we are laughing because we know it is a story and they are the third passersby and we understand that kind of pattern. But something, there is something real as well.  Erm... if he stirs I will strike, muttered the other, but at this moment a dog ((laughs)) scenting along the ground came in and gazed ultimately at each of these wicked men. You see that dog like someone out of a Disney cartoon, staring first at one and then at the other and then at the quiet sleeper he then lapped out of the fountain. Why do you think that makes the villains give up because it is only a dog.  
13: But they know somebody will be behind him, 
14: Yes, they do say that but it's almost as if, the dog is kind of judging them ((laughs)) which is completely ridiculous but...
00: Yes just by looking at them.
14: It's like it's kind of made them realise themselves...
00: Here I am with a dagger, now that dog has seen me.
13: It's almost like it's kind of broken the spell or the moment
14: Yes, yes
13: That they were in.  The kind of determination has gone.
00: And that has happened in the previous 2 hasn't it that, because in the, in the old lady and gentleman, it was the erm... 
15: The servant
00: Yes the servant suddenly said, the coach is ready sir, said the servant behind, breaking it, erm... 
11: then they immediately go off into thinking how silly they were, it's a very fast sort of oh dear that was a daft idea.
00: that was ridiculous.
11: Yes.  
00: And yet in the... when they think of it was very, very ridiculous this is at the bottom of 154, how they should have ever have dreamed of doing, it was so ridiculous yes the merchant threw himself back in the carriage and occupied his mind with the plan of a magnificent asylum for unfortunate men of business. So I mean, he has moved from his wife sort of saying this could be our baby, to him saying no, no, no, yet, it is a translation isn't it, of some act of generosity.  
15: Something positive has come from it hasn't it?
00: Yes but positive in a...
15: Possibly
00: Yes but in a very... it's not like giving all to one person, no I shall make a lovely hospital, is more sensible probably than giving it all to one person. A stranger you have met by the wayside.  And, also we don't know whether he actually does it... the merchant threw himself back in the carriage and occupied his mind, with a plan but maybe that could never come about.  The girl wasn't interrupted actually, she just was disappointed wasn't she, erm... she fought the bee off, he didn't wake up erm... how soundly he sleeps she murmured as if with disappointment that he hasn't woken up but she doesn't, though she has fought the bee she doesn't seem to have the courage to actually wake him up, and say I have just saved you from a terrible bee.  Erm... 
13: She is changed by the encounter slightly though isn't she, she trips along the road not so lightly.
00: Yes,
13: the same way they were changed by the encounter.
00: And given the sort of starting place of the story the idea that we don't know about the things that don't happen to us but they very nearly happen to us, erm... the same then for the old couple and the young girl, that something has nearly happened to both of those, nearly got an adopted son, nearly fell in love with somebody but because they are awake, where he is asleep, David Swan there is something they are aware of even though it might just be as you said in the old couple's sense, a sense of something, nearly did something stupid, erm... and hers of a sort of disappointment I think, isn't it she is... she departed but did not trip along the road so lightly as when she came.  She seemed as if she sort of aged a bit or got more sensible or something.  Poor kid.  And the villains then, pssh said one villain we can do nothing now, the dog's master must be close behind there is no evidence of that, could just be a dog erm... so I think your idea it's as if they, it's the fact that something has seen them, 
15: Interruption, interruption to the plan.
00: Whatever it was, yes.   The man with dagger thrust back the weapon into his bosom and drew forth a pocket pistol, but not of that kind which kills by a single discharge it was a flask of liquor, with a block tin tumbler screwed into the mouth.  Each drank a comfortable dram, and left the spot with so many jests and such a laughter at their un accomplished wickedness that they might be said to have gone on their way rejoicing.  Why, why do you think? They nearly could have got loads of money out of his pockets or done a great violent crime there, interrupted by the dog, now they go along happy as anything.  Do you think that, that sense that you might be relieved to have not done something.
13: Unaccomplished things.
00: Almost like getting away with it although they haven't done anything, but they are free now to be... oh we didn't have to murder that guy.  
13: they seem quite giddy with it don't they?
00: Yes.  In a few hours they had forgotten the whole affair nor once imagined that the recording angel had written down the crime of murder against their souls, in letters as durable as eternity.  So it is as if they too have avoided a fate or a, and because they are awake they are conscious of that, and erm... it is like an escape they could have been murders luckily for them the dog came.  As for David Swan he still slept quietly.  Neither conscious of the shadow of death when it hung over him, nor of the flow of renewed life when that shadow was withdrawn.  He slept but no longer so quietly, as at first an hour's repose had snatched from his elastic frame the weariness with which so many hours of toil had burdened it, now he stirred, now moved his lips without a sound, now talked in an inward tone, to the noon day spectres of his dream.  But a noise of wheels came rattling louder and louder along the road, until it dashed through the dispersing mists of David's slumber and there was the stage coach, he started up with all his ideas about him hello, driver take a passenger shouted he, room on top answered the driver.  Up mounted David and bowled away, merrily away merrily towards Boston without so much as a parting glance at that fountain of dream like vicissitude.  He knew not that a phantom of wealth had thrown a golden hue upon its waters,  nor that one of love had sighed softly to their murmur, nor that one of death had threatened to crimson them with his blood, or in the brief hour since he lay down to sleep, sleeping or waking we hear not the airy footsteps of the strange things that almost happen. Does it not argue a superintending providence that while viewless and unexpected events thrust themselves continually athwart our path, there should still be regularity enough in mortal life to render foresight even partially available.  Hard, very hard last sentence there.
11: It is, isn't it.
00: Does it not argue that a superintendent... argue a superintending providence that while viewless and unexpected events thrust themselves continually athwart our path, there should still be enough regularity, there should still be regularity enough in mortal life to render foresight even partially available. Just thinking of getting here this morning, erm... and all of, so if I just think of my own journey from leaving West Kirby erm... all the possible things that might have happened, so there might have been a tractor on Saughall Massie Road whatever, you know... well sometimes there is.  Erm... that could have made me really late and by the time  I got to the tunnel then there would be the traffic jam etc, but there wasn't so, 101 possible things haven't happened, I didn't get a speeding ticket in the tunnel, erm... which has happened me  on other occasions, so...
15: I didn't know you could get a speeding ticket in the tunnel.
00: Well yes as you come out yes, yes.  Be careful.  Erm... unexpected so viewless and unexpected events thrust themselves continually athwart our path, but there is still regularity enough in mortal life to render foresight even partially available. I feel I almost can't follow the logic of that, can you try and explain it to me a bit?
11: It's tricky isn't it, I mean the idea is that despite the erm... the constant play of these unexpected events you can still plan ahead, you can still have a normal regular, sequence of events.
00: So he can think I am going to Boston?
11: Yes and I will get there.
00: And I will get there. 
11: Yes
00: and you could plan for that even though these, weird things that nearly happen are all happening.
11: yes
00: That is an odd thought.  
11: It is an odd thought yes.  
00: That suddenly the universe could be full of lots of extra possibilities but does it argue a superintending providence erm... does that mean God do you think superintending providence? There is providence said one of the sayings in the fall of a sparrow, that's from the bible surely isn't  it? ?I think I have heard that.  
00: Is it providence that I don't know.  
11: I think it's more like a general sense of fate and destiny isn't it?  
00: yes
11: Destiny is a bit more tricky but...
15: So rather than an act from above. 
11: Yes that's right, that's right.  
13: But it implies a positive thing almost like something is watching over, that [57.18]
00: yes because superintending.
13: It's a very long sentence and it's funny I have split it into two parts I am trying to process up to continually athwart our path and then the next part seems to  because that's out of our awareness and control isn't it, superintending providence. And then it becomes mortal, and...
11: and it's a benign plan effectively because it allows us to plan ahead, 
00: Yes
11:  and not get too kind of over wrought about what happens...
00: the things that might happen, erm...  and if you have to go through all the things that might happen I mean sometimes when you get into a, erm... I am mainly not a worried person, but sometimes when I get worried, erm... it is very, very hard to switch off that thing of creating various possibilities.  Erm... that what if, what if, what if... 
15: [58.16]
00: Yes or things that might erm...  just going to look back at the beginning of the story where he has a similar, that similar matching paragraph, we can be but partially acquainted even with the events which actually influence our course through life and our final destiny. There are innumerable other events if such they may be called, which come close upon us, yet pass away without actual results or even betraying their near approach by the reflection of any light or shadow across our minds.  Could we know all the vicissitudes of our fortunes, life would be too full of hope and fear,  yes I suppose that's it isn't it, it's as if it's bad enough dealing with the hopes and fears of things that really do happen or are happening, erm... if you were to take into account all the possibilities of things that haven't happened or that could happen it is almost unbearable, erm... 
11: the benefits of ignorance ((laughs)).
00: yes, yes and of not going, not letting your mind imagine things.   Erm...  does that make you sort of feel confident you know that it is ok, because thinking of you walking out in the dark, you know erm... is it partly a confidence that just thinks I am not going to think, oh there could be a murderer hiding in the bushes, or a mad dog or whatever it is, of course there could, but if you are going to do the thing... erm... you maybe not want to go into those thoughts too much or you might want to stop them if they are there. Did you feel scared when you went out in the dark?
12: No not really.  But I was just surprised how dark it was, very little lighting.Jane :And thoughts that there might be I don't know even just falling over, do you just think do you just put that out then.
12: I don't think.  I don't think about that.
13: I don't either but for some people they do, don't they that is overwhelming,  kind of the fear of what could... what could happen, can be disabling really. Whereas you know I either don't think about it or as you say on the balance of possibility it could happen but it is unlikely to...[talk together] 
12: you can see it a positive, end up with a positive.
15: ... actually could or couldn't I mean I sometimes I walk up from Ballantrae and I do often think as I am walking along that path, 
00: There is no one here.
15: but then you just put it out of your mind and think well it's highly unlikely but then I am always relieved when I see a dog walker ((laughs)).  
00: yes so it's as if there are millions of possibilities, but you have a little safety net or somewhere in the back of your mind.
15: Well if you thought too much into it you just wouldn't put yourself in that position to be vulnerable really. 
14: yes because like last night I decided not to walk out in the dark alone, I waited for other people to come out so I obviously weighed it up.
00: weighed it up. 
14: ((laughs)) and decided not to,  but you know if I... I could have made the decision to go out and it probably would have been fine but you know, you don't know. 
15: Yes you decided not to put yourself in that position.
00: Yes you are choosing aren't you? What do you think about the fact that in this story we start with that quite difficult, almost like philosophical proposition and we end with it, but in-between we have got what seems like, almost like a children's fairy tale though nothing happens.  Erm... it's very odd to have a story where nothing has happened.
15: It's just a catalogue of events really isn't it? One thing after another.
11: Like a little parable.
00: Yes and then he wakes up and knows nothing and on he goes.  
15: Ignorance is bliss.
00: Well lets go on and read the poem that follows this which is the road not taken by Robert Frost.  Just over the last page.  The Road not taken. Two roads diverged in a yellow wood. I am sorry I could not travel both, and be one traveller long I stood and looked down one as far as I could to where it bent in the  undergrowth, then took the other.  As just as fair and having perhaps the better claim because it was grassy and wanted wear.  Though as for that the passing there had worn them really about the same and both that morning equally lay in leaves no step had trodden black. Oh I kept the first for another day. Yes knowing how way leads on to way I doubted if I should ever come back.  I should be telling this with a sigh somewhere, ages and ages hence, two roads diverged in a wood, and I... I took the one less travelled by and that has made all the difference.   Don't know if it's worth just because they are there and I find them slightly distracting the notes, on the side there, that Angie has put in we may as well just have a quick look at those. The poem always gets people talking and speculating if I had not gone to a friend's party that day I would never have met .... or more generally, what if you alwyas caught the bus to work but for one day, for no reason you decided to walk and that was the day the bus was bombed.  People often say the poem is about choices, yet what sort of choice can you make based on little or no evidence.  Or facts. One 90 year old said she was interested in the poems last line and that has made all the difference. And the group wondered about that final word and what exactly it meant.  That is what I like about it she said, you can never really know what the difference might have been but you can still think about the possibilities. The slightly archaic language of the story sometimes bothers people there is always much discussion of the element of chance or providence in our lives. One group talked about angels good and bad, the thing is  said Roy, we just get up in the morning and set off, we don't know what is going to happen for good or ill or if we will get back into our bed that night, can't stay in bed all day, worrying about what might or might not have happened.  Which is pretty much what we were just saying.  So, don't know if any of you already know this poem, do you know it?
11: I have read it once, but a long time ago.
00: Yes, shall I give it another read.  The Road Not Taken. Two road diverged in a yellow wood, I am sorry I could not travel both, and be one traveller long I stood and looked down one as far as I could to where it bent in the undergrowth.  Then took the other as just as fair, and having perhaps the better claim because it was grassy and wanted wear. Though as for that, the passing there had worn them really about the same.  And both that morning equally lay in leaves no step had trodden black, oh I kept the first for another day, yet knowing how way leads on to way, I doubted if I should ever come back.  I shall be telling this with a sigh, somewhere ages and ages hence, two roads diverged in a wood, and I... I took the one less travelled by. And that has made all the difference.  I don't know if any of you can remember a moment or a time where you feel you have been at that moment in a wood where there are two choices, and you have got to pick one of them.  I am sorry I could not travel both and be one traveller, erm... when I had finished my undergraduate degree at university, and was hoping I would erm... get a good enough degree to be awarded a scholarship to do a PhD, but I didn't know, and erm... I was applying for jobs as well because I was a young single mom, and erm... I went for an interview at Birkenhead high school for girls and erm... got offered a job that night by the headmistress you know junior  [01.07.59] English department and I was going to find out the next day whether I had got the grant for the PhD and I said to this head mistress, you know I remember saying to her can I answer you tomorrow and she said no, I need an answer now.
11: Oh, yes
00: And I was standing in a phone box like this in this you know thinking I have got to make a choice, but and I don't know either of them I don't know, a very  unhappy school career myself whether I could even be an English teacher I had no idea, or whether I would get the scholarship to do my PhD, no idea, it seemed an incredibly unfair like I remember standing there thinking this isn't fair. In the end I said...
15: Often the way things happen.
00: Yes. I said erm... I said I wasn't going to take the job.
11: And yet you can work as he does... you move from option 1 to option 2 and then you know you have a cup of tea option 1, it is going to be option 1, option 2 is not as good, and then about 10 minutes later you think no actually option 2, option 2 is a lot better.
00: Yes because it was grassy,  but as for that, the passing there had worn really about the same, you are back to not being able to decide again. And 2 road diverged in a yellow wood,  I am sorry I could not travel both, and be one traveller, and that is the funny thing I mean I think that is why Angie has put that poem following the story is that feeling that, there is only one path through your life, even though there are millions of choices, erm... that is a funny thing. I remember reading this poem in a group of people who were refugees, and many of them struggling with their English, but everybody erm... knew that feeling, of standing at a point of terrible decision where erm... you can look down the road as long as you like but you still can't tell what is going to happen.
15: Sometimes you just have to make the decision and take your chance.
00: Yes.  I looked and... long I stood and looked down one as far as I could to where it bent in the undergrowth, then took the other.  Yes.  
11: And it's not a ... like other decisions in life, where it is a kind of almost a forced choice you know you have got to do this really, erm... this is really one where he is you know you are playing across the options and both can seem the best option.
00: yes stay at home, get in a container and head for England.
11: Yes that's right.
00: That's a big...that's a big decision.  I don't know whether it matters that this is in a wood, 2 roads diverged in a yellow wood and Frost of course thinking of it and I hadn't thought of that before is, he is a New England poet isn't he, he is probably writing those same maples that Nathaniel Hawthorne's David Swan lay down  under, erm... it is autumn or they are at a point of change the whole wood is at a point of change, 2 road diverged in a yellow wood and sorry I could not travel both and be one traveller long I stood.  
16: He has got a lack of confidence hasn’t he.
00: Yes, that staying in that decision point for a long...
16: A confident person wouldn't see two roads.
00: Yes, oh would almost just see one.  That is interesting.  Yes.  And that takes me back to the landing in the phone box, this would be 1983 with my job offer, first time anybody had ever offered me a job and thinking if I had been really confident I would have thought no I want to do the PhD but I was also thinking, I don't want to go back to waitressing erm... so that is all those things were in that decision and it was partly about confidence or self belief or something. 
16: It's like people who start businesses, people who start a business don't think of failing, they just... 
00: ((laughs)) they just imagine succeeding. 
16: think I am going to make it.
11: Yes that's right, that is true isn't it. And the one he looks down he can only see to the point where it was bent in the undergrowth. So the sense is that you know when you are actually looking at a pathway for a career or whatever it is, you can only see part of the way down, it's not as if you have got a long vista. Oh yes, I can see where that leads that is a lot better than this. It is trapped off very quickly so it's...
00: So you really don't know.
11: Yes 
00: whereas for somebody else in my position who was really thinking I want to be a head mistress of a school there would have been no, bother.
16: Depends whether the roads go like that, or if they go like that at a certain point.
00: Yes, yes, yes.
13: Maybe that is significant about the wood as well that you can't see that far ahead. It could have been a path anywhere you could see miles.  You could see what was at the end of... but you can't in a wood because of the...
11:  Yes that's right yes I think that is true. It's interesting at the end and that has made all the difference, whether that's a... said in regret, or very positively. I mean in a sense it could be, it could be both couldn't it.  It could be like I really made a great decision, you know, that was absolutely the right path to take. But the actual tone of the poem seems to me to suggest more that something like erm... well not deep regret but a sense of uncertainty about whether it really was the best route.
00: It's funny that years later you wouldn't still know, whether it was...
11: Yes that's right.
16: You could have ended up worse the other way.
11: yes that's right yes.  Yes.  
00: Would someone else read it for us let me hear it in someone else's voice if you would.  Somebody.
16: I can’t, my voice is gone.
00: Oh right. Perhaps would you Helen?
14: Ok.  Two roads diverged in the yellow wood, I am sorry  I could not travel both and be one traveller long I stood and looked down one as far as I could to where it bent in the undergrowth. Then took the other as just as fair and having perhaps the better claim because it was grassy and wanted wear, though as for that the passing there,  had worn them really about the same.  And both that morning equally lay in leaves no step had trodden black, how I kept the first for another day, yet knowing how way leads onto way I doubted if I should ever come back. I shall be telling this with a sign somewhere ages and ages hence, two roads diverged in a wood, and I... I took the one less travelled by and that has made all the difference.
00: Thank you very much.  I noticed as you were reading a sort of how the poem falters with that I at the end, and I - I took thinking about David's point about confidence, erm... I wonder whether he is there thinking and I, there is almost like a gap then, erm... I took the one less travelled by as if he is thinking, as if there is some moment of... I don't know anxiety almost about who I is.  
11: because he is telling it with a sigh, so it doesn't sound like a good story ((laughs)).
00: Yes I shall be telling this with a sigh.
11: A good story in the sense of you know I am going to tell you how I made the right decision, many years ago.
00: Yes, ages and ages hence.  
15: But how does he know that it's made all the difference, he didn't take the other path? He doesn't really know that does he?
00: He doesn't know does he and it's almost as if he is still at the... point of decision by the end of the poem.
11: Yes.
00: Really though he has imagined a future, erm... does he make a proper decision even, I am not sure. I looked down one as far as I could to where it bent in the undergrowth, then took the other.  Because that feels like a sort of, almost like an instinctive I don't know you can go over, and over and over it and then suddenly, no I am going that way. It doesn't feel like decision it feels more like instinct or something.  As just as fair and having perhaps the better claim because it was grassy and wanted wear.  Though, so... yes did I really decide to go down it because of that reason, erm... though as for that the passing there, had worn really about the same.  So... even if I make up a reason as to why I chose a) rather than b) 
16: He still doesn't want to rough it though he wants to go down the nice one doesn't he?
11: Yes that's right.
16: His description for going down it.
13: That has brought up for me, though what Dave said about even if you go down... you don't know that somewhere down the line they won't converge and I am just thinking about things I have done in my life where I have thought I am never going to do that again, and somewhere down the line I have thought how have I ended up...
00: Doing that again.
13: Because I think I am making an aware choice but there are things that are outside of my awareness that start... that start coming into play.
00: And have powerful effects on us.  
13: And then it's suddenly oh I am here again and I really, really think no I am not going to end up there or, but I have.  
00: And I wonder if that's part of the value of the story just thinking of the oddness of the story, that it does put into your mind the feeling that while you are like the sleeper the person who doesn't have consciousness, things and people are happening you know that you are not even aware of and you might not therefore take into any account.  But, but they are there.
11: Yes and just missing you as it were, yes.
13: And it's about your perception of it as well, because he said he chose the one that looks grassy and really they were both worn about the same so he thinks he is making the better choice but really there is no...
00: And whether you make, if this poem was spread out over the sort of if you had 1 - 99 years of human life, erm... you know is he at sort of point 33 and just thinking imagining or when you are 90 would that decision look very, very different.  
15: Probably.
11: Yes
00: Probably would. So those perspectives change all the time and they sort of do in the poem, don't they?
11: Yes they do, yes.  I mean I like the way that yet knowing how way leads on to way, so it is not just like one way that has been chosen over another, that leads, that will lead onto a further choice and so there is a whole series of connections that are going to be made simply on the strength of this single decision.  Left or right.  
00: Yes. Do you find that alarming or just interesting or? Do you think it's true when you look back over decisions in the past, I mean it's as if you know how branches of the tree all do that don't they, branch out in lots of ways, put when you are going forward you have got almost no sense of those branches, only by looking back do you see the pattern.
11: Yes.  
00: It's as if everything sort of in the future bends out of sight.  
16: Depends if you have got a goal though doesn't it. If you had a goal then it's important, that is what I find.
00: that's right and what you are saying about like somebody who sets up a business and then they just think I am going to do that, that is a way of taking control of the future.
16: Then you evaluate it along the journey don't you?
00: Yes. Have you set up a business?
16: that is where I am now.
00: Is it.
16: Because I have got no, I am not confident so that is the thing I do, I... I think too much about what I am doing so I don't tend to do it. Coming here was hard enough ((laughs)).
00: Was it, good! Well done, well done yes.  
15: I think also it depends on the importance of the decision as well. There can be so many different things perspectives. You could flip a coin for a lot of decisions but not all of them.
11: Yes that's right it’s interesting. I mean sometimes you are actually, you make a decision, but you don't realise how important that decision is and it doesn't seem to be a matter of really erm... conscious choice, you know you realise later, oh yes I should have never have joined that...
15: Or not great importance at the time.
11: that's right, whereas he, he makes it a moment of very conscious erm... painful choice, standing there with the two routes, and at the time he made the choice, so it is not just retrospective.  He remembers having difficulty making the choice.  
15: But choices can be very agonising.  
11: Yes that's true, that's right, absolutely.
15: Again depending on the importance of them.
00: it's almost as if his reasons for choosing seem to, as soon as he said a reason, he doubts whether that is true because he says, erm...  then took the other as just as fair, so it was as lovely and having perhaps the better claim because it was grassy, so no one had gone down that one so that is why, though as for that, the passing there had worn them really about the same. So actually it wasn't that different to the other one.
11: No
00: I am just wondering what the time gap is between, where you know on a life span chart, where that though thought would come in is it, is it many years after making the decision or at the same time. Erm... having perhaps the better claim because it was grassy and wanted wear, though as for that, that's a second thought, that is a... a retrospective isn't it?  And thinking about when I tell people about The Reader Organisation, the story of The Reader how it's become a story, but when I think of the reality of it, so I will say oh yes I worked in the University and then I began to think I want to get books out of the university and then I will... so I then set up The Reader it sounds like choice, choice, choice, choice but when I think of the actual reality, it wasn't... it wasn't like that it was much more like oh... [01.24.18] it didn't feel like choices it felt like blundering, in the wood. Erm... so erm...
16: You must have had a determination though. You must have had a...
00: yes but it was very small, it was... 
16: Because you have got goals, that is what...
00: For the benefit of the tape this is confidential.  I had a boss in the university who was... who was unhelpful, and you know I would come up with ideas for things and say oh I have had an idea that we could do and then he would just say I will make a note of that and then nothing ever happened, you know so that began to make me very, very cross because I could see that the department was going downhill and we weren't getting enough students in and things like that.  So that sort of thing I suppose made... you know continuing education at the university has been in decline for probably 30 years, and I really felt it could be different, but... it was not possible to make it happen there. So partly frustration, I don't think it was the same as determination or knowing. It was just more like...
16: Or you had a dream. You had something where you...
00: I had something but it didn't dream is too grand for it, it was more grumpy ((laughs)) more grumpy.
11: but decisions are often reactive, aren't they, they are reactive, you are not standing there perfectly at the end of the wood looking oh yes which one is it going to be left or right. You are just reacting, something is coming at you.
00: Yes as he says erm... it was grassy and needs, wants wear someone needs to walk down that path but was it really, nah not really it was just a thing he said.  
11: But they do diverge, that is really serious ((laughs)).
00: Yes that's a big word isn't it, diverge. They really... it is a definite choice, yes so at some point I did decide to leave the university, and that is a definitely a diversion moment.   But I think you do it too much grandeur to say it was  a dream, it's almost as if, I don't know that emerges as you go on further on down that path round the bend where you can't see what is going to happen.  See how he changes it again, erm... the passing there had worn them really about the same, and both that morning equally lay in leaves, so at one point he is saying one is grassy and wants wear, but then he goes on to say that morning actually both of them were covered in leaves.  So you couldn't even probably see the path properly because it was covered, both were covered in leaves that no step had trodden black.  So, was it grassy and wanting wear even or was that just a... a thought he had at some point and then it changed. And then you get that odd line in the middle of the third verse of oh, I kept the first for another day!  Erm... 
11: So he is actually playing with the decision by saying well I will take this decision, I will take this one but you know erm... the other one I will keep
00: ((laughs)) yes.
11: For later on.  
00: Yes
15: Or I may change my mind.
11: Yes, that's right.
00: I do that all the time about when I am retired you know I think when I am retired, I am going to take up painting I am going to paint really big paintings of trees and things like that, and then other times I think when I am retired... you know I am going to get a horse, you know and then even if I am too old to ride it at least I will be able to groom it, and so on, or when I retire I will go back to playing the cello. Erm... they are like possible alternatives aren't they and I want to keep them all in play, erm... oh I kept the first for another day.  Yet knowing... go on.
15: I was going to say the thought of something else being there keeps you going.  
00: Yes, yes you don't want to lose that possible possibility but erm... you do have to, well I find I do you know someone will say why can't you play the cello now, why do you have to wait until you are retired, can't you find 20 minutes a day, can't you I think oh no, I can't ((laughs)) what is that about.  Erm...  yes knowing how way leads on to way, I doubted if I should ever come back. Oh I kept the first for another day. Yet, knowing how way leads onto way I doubted if I should ever come back.  Erm... that feels to me very true that line, yet knowing how way leads onto way. Erm... both in paths and in how you are in yourself, in your mental pathways if you like.  
11: He is predicting erm... telling it with a sigh isn't he, that is the point you made earlier erm... he is not actually now as it were an old man reflecting way back, on this early decision. He is actually predicting that in the future, erm... he will be telling it with a sigh, so it's... 
00: Does he think he has made the wrong decision even now just at the point where he has made it?
11: Yes, yes almost as if he is saying that erm... just after having made the decision, yes.  
00: Does everybody feel it is a bit of a... not sad, it is not so much as sad I can't remember what the word you used was, erm... but slightly wistful or something, or does anybody think, and that has made all the difference, is a sort of... positive?
14: I think maybe it's just, in trepidation because he doesn't know where the rest of the path is going to lead him, but he knows that it is probably made some sort of difference in his life, but he doesn't know what difference that is yet.
00: Trepidation is a good word, for this poem I think that's right.  The Road Not Taken. It's interesting that that is the title, not the road I took.  So what is in his mind is...
16: Never taken. 
00: Yes he can't... he can't get over the fact that there was one he didn't take.
11: And that's the one that plays on the mind, most often.
00: Yes not the one you did take because you are in that.
11: that's right yes, and as you get older as well, when you get older erm... the roads not taken can become quite powerful erm... presences in your mind. 
00: that is interesting and interesting that you use the word presences because it makes me think back to the story and to those things that didn't happen to David Swan, erm... the old lady who would have been a mother to him, that is a big... miss in a life, erm... the young girl who you know was in love with him erm... I will read it again or would someone else read it again I don't know, if anybody is up to it. 
12: Would you like me to read it?
00: Yes I would thank you.  
12: Two roads diverged in the yellow wood, I am sorry I could not travel both, and be one traveller. Long I stood and looked down one as far as I could to where it bent in the undergrowth,  then took the other just as fair and having perhaps the better claim because it was grassy and wanted wear. Though as for that, the passing there, had worn them really about the same, and both that morning equally lay in leaves no step had trodden black. Oh I kept the first for another day.  Yet knowing how way leads onto way, I doubted if I should ever come back. I shall be telling this with a sigh, somewhere ages and ages hence, two roads diverged in  a wood and I, I took the one less travelled by and that has made all the difference.  
00: Thank you that was good. I noticed as you read, you put almost like a tiny question mark after the I at the end, two roads diverged in a wood and I as if you put into your intonation there as if the person was thinking about what they had done, it was good wasn't it. Yes.   And the other thing I noticed as you were reading was the somewhere ages and ages hence which made a thought come into my mind, I should be telling this I don't know if you put a stress also on shall, I SHALL be telling this which puts it very much in the future, I shall be telling this with a sigh somewhere ages and ages hence. I just was struck by the relationship between somewhere and ages hence as if, time and place had somehow either become the same thing or got compressed together, because it should say sometime ages and ages hence shouldn't it not somewhere erm... as if the erm... the where of the poem and the time of it, are the same and walking is like that or choosing a path is like that isn't it. You are going somewhere but walking makes it like be in time, as you come up the erm... quiet bit where all the rhododendrons are,  erm... I walked up there myself the other day and I had that funny feeling of there is no one here, and it's... it was the middle of the day, erm... but there is, there is something about crossing I don't know what I am trying to say here.  Crossing space and time.
11: No I think that's right, I think that it is... I think it makes that line richer that he is imagining other spaces as well as distant times, other spaces...
00: So  where will that path have... 
11: Yes
00: where will it have led him to.
11: Yes exactly.  
16: I would like to see the girl in the story if there was two men though.((laughs))
16: Which one would she have picked.  Because he was the ideal when he was on his own wasn't he.
00: yes, how very, very telling of you to say that yes, he was ideal when he was on his own.  He was the only choice really wasn't he, if there had been two yes, what an interesting thought ((laughs)).
11: Going back to that earlier point, it is a lovely open-endedness about  whether the difference was a good difference or a bad difference, so it's not actually a poem of regret in any clear way. He actually... it feels, I remember reading it in school, as a poem of quiet regret, but actually it's not even that...
00: Is it more about uncertainty, then is it?
11: Yes
00: Is it just not knowing and it still ends with that.  That has made all the difference, but what difference.
11: You don't know... no that's right, that is right you don't know where you would have gone had you taken the road not taken.  And that could lead to erm... a feeling that you made a mistake, the poem doesn't erm... clarify that any further does it?
00: No it just leaves it as a possibility.  Or an unknown.  
13: I feel it's that kind of wistful thing you said but it is just that that is just how it is. This seems to be about making very distinct decisions but I am being drawn to most of the choices we make every day, we are just making them out of awareness and we are just drifting down paths rather than  standing making thoughts and deciding to go down... my friend came to pick me up last night we went to the theatre and she said I am sorry I am late she was coming from Aigburth to my house and she said I found myself outside my mother's house, she had gone to her mom's because she was coming down the same road, so she had just stopped thinking about coming to mine, she said how did I end up here
15: autopilot ((laughs))
13: and had to double back on herself so, although she knew where she was going... once she started she just drifted because as you said it was autopilot, you are just drawn towards...
00: what is your normal path as it were. 
14: It's funny because I have got an identical twin, so like I think from childhood we kind of assumed that our lives would follow similar paths, and they haven't like over the last seven years I think she has kind of followed the more conventional path that I always thought I would travel, but I haven't for various reasons and you know you just don't know what is going to  happen next.  
00: Yes that must be very odd with a twin.
14: So it's almost like I could see what I could have done...
00: In this other person,
14: Yes. But obviously we would have always had totally separate lives, but it's just interesting to kind of...
00: I wonder if that is a big issue with twins I mean especially identicals because, I know someone else who is part of an identical twin set and it is as if you have always got that other possibility living right, you are not a twin are you? I could hear you nodding. Yes, so.  
17: You do have kind of pairs in families sometimes.
00: Yes but none so much as an identical twin.  
16: did you make a conscious decision?
14: Not really no I don't think so.  
15: Do people expect, would people have expected you to do the same?
14: Erm... I think even I expected that we would do the same at least up until the age that we are now you know we are 21 now, but like erm... she went straight from school had a gap year, went to university, but I spent a lot of time in hospital for quite a few years so that wasn't really a possibility for me, so now I am going to university next year so in a way we have kind of come back again, but you know we have taken such different paths along the way.
00: That will be interesting also to see as life goes on whether you know, does it feel, I don't know, does it make it feel a kind of out of kilter feeling? Because I have, because I had a very odd childhood and adolescence, you know I didn't grow up properly I didn't grow up in the right order, sort of thing.
14: yes I know what you mean actually ((laughs)) because like I spent a lot of time away from home, obviously so I kind of grew up in one sense but she grew up in a different sense because she has gone away and had independence at university earlier than I have, so it's kind of different ways. 
00: Yes, it would be very interesting to see over time you know over the next ten, twenty years how you...
16: Another study you can 
11: Yes that’s right.
00: A research project yes.  Good idea.  Yes.  I you know I feel as if, I had a very strange experience of that when my youngest child left home, because I had a... I had my first child when I was 18 and erm... went to university in my 20s, and I had looked after my brothers and sister up until my own child was born, so I never had any period of being an adult with no children, or even a young person with no children I always had to look after young children and erm... when my youngest child left home, and I would be I don't know 51 or 2, I suddenly it was as if I suddenly thought, I kept thinking I don't have to go home, I don't... it's 4.30 and I don't have to be at home that feeling that any of you who are moms will have had, there is always that long routine of you have got to be in by 3.30, you have got to get to school by 3.30.
15: I am still on that wheel ((laughs))
00: yes it was just a most peculiar feeling of thinking I could go to the pictures now, you know which was like a sort of, almost like how you might think a 15 year old might feel, free I could be free, but I was in my 50s and I think that is a little bit of adolescence I haven't had yet.  
15: I can't wait ((laughs)).  
00: What are you going to do?
15: Oh everything.  All those things that I keep collecting and putting ... the garage is getting fuller, and fuller ((laughs)). 
00: Yes going to have a go at those.  So have you got some teenagers then now or young children or?
15: Well I have got a 25 year old,  who is at home she has had a lot illness and I have got a boy of almost 17 who is still at school so, and there is that big gap between them so I feel like I have been on the school run forever.  So... 
16: It will be the grandkids next ((laughs))
00: Oh that is completely different I can assure you. 
13: it can be a hard habit to break though because as I say, that out of awareness thing, because my son is older now, so I don't have to go home, from work and make his tea yet I do, and when he says you don't have to I am ok but... but what will I do if I don't do that and then that is when it comes into my awareness that I am just on a... treadmill doing something and I don't have to and then it's like oh, what will I do if I don't.  
11: Yes that is right, I think that is absolutely right.
00: And to take that any further you would have to bring yourself to one of these points wouldn't you which would be like a choice point, shall I do something, it's often, easier, much easier to not even see that point and just to keep on the... on the path, on the treadmill.
13: Because routines are familiar and safe aren't they so to then do something else, because even over something as seemingly mundane as that, it involves active thought and change and kind of this is going to feel different to that, and...
00: And the scariness of say like the guy lying you know with the possible potential murderers and you didn't know about them or, those potential things that could happen that we don't normally allow into consciousness.  What are you going to read at university?
14: Psychology hopefully.  
00: Great, good.  That is probably about us for the day, we will have the forms now please Grace.  
15: Where are you going?
14: Leeds is my top choice at the moment and I have looked at quite a few, but I have got like 5 choices. But I have already got my grades so...
00: Right it's just straight [01.45.31] good congratulations that is good. 
13: So that is a really standing at the path of [01.45.37] isn't it, where to go.  
00: Do you know that George went to Leeds?
14: Yes I was going to speak to him about it actually. 
00: Yes it seems a really good place for people to go. Hardly any biscuits have been eaten.
12: I ate a bourbon, 
15: We had a jammy something.[talk over]
00: Ok.   There is one week when I won't be able to be here and I have asked Sophie to come in my place, erm... I have to go to Denmark to do some work for The Reader, and it had to be that Friday so sorry about that, not next week the week after.
12: Actually Jane with you saying, erm... I am hoping to attend next Friday but erm... workmen are going to my mother's house and they did say it might, it may... still be carried on till Friday but I am hoping not.  
11: I think I maybe out on the 22nd, that Friday.   I have a meeting in London, I keep on imaging that you can get back from  London later than you can, I think in the old days they used to go I seem to remember coming back on an 11 o'clock, midnight admittedly but now once you go past 9 o'clock 
00: Yes  it's impossible, yes that drives me mad.  It is not erm... not good.  Erm... yes I have had to get that means sometimes I have to stay over in London, and get a 6 o'clock train to get back here for work.  Poor service.
11: the 6 o'clock  wow, that's heavy duty that one.
00: It's horrible.   So never mind.   Next week we are going to read from Great Expectations, the erm... extract in here that is from there and with the other group when we were reading it they really started to enjoy that very much and I said that when the research project is over,  I am going to keep this slot in my diary and any of you who would like to keep coming can and we will read it then the whole of Great Expectations or something like that erm... so if you have got the chance to keep coming, erm... you could bear that in mind.
16: I have got [01.48.37]
00: You have got to keep going good, good.
16: No, no I was tied up last week, I have been on... this week.
00: So did you get to many of the design ones then?
16: I think I missed two or one, 
00: We are really glad that you have come back to be honest.
16: It is only because of other things that I can't get out of, but even when I was on the last course the eight days I tried to go, I will come on the Tuesday because it was a block thing they wouldn't let me but I enjoyed it and it was in capable hands anyway.  
00: Right
13: That has just reminded me of something when I was at the reading group on Wednesday night we had forms to fill in about erm... that seems to become a reality about where the Calderstones are going to go, are they still around because it feels like we did so much work on that...
11: Yes there is that I know I saw that.
00: The forms are downstairs yes if you would like to have a go on the way out we would be really glad.
15: I did it yesterday when we were at that meeting yesterday...
13: It was kind of perspective [01.49.44]
12: Has the attendance been more or less...
00: As we hoped?
12: Yes
00:  I don't know really do you? Have the research groups, we lost a few people.
12: Perhaps initially but that often happens, though doesn't it just initially.
00: Yes but seems to be relatively stable.
17: I think this group particularly has been quite steady.  
00: Good, thanks very much.  
13: I wanted to everyone to have the opportunity because I was thinking oh we have done lots of work on that.. it's almost like oh I want it to be where we decided.
11: Yes that's right I thought that.
17: Can I say something. We were talking last week about maybe having a presentation erm... at the end of the 12 weeks, of all the work that has been done on the build environment group, so we are looking at what Graham has put together from the two sessions but we will say more about that but just so you know that there will be a sort of... 
00: Like a finale?
17: Yes
12: We were hoping about that, we had mentioned it within this group.
00: Good.  And we will invite strangers?
17: yes yes.
13: That was an interest as well wasn't it whether we will divert or converge whether at the end of it we will come up with similar ideas or something completely different.
15: What about our acronym... Are we still thinking are we.  
11: Still thinking.
12: I wonder if it's still raining?
11: It is I believe yes.  Right... [talk over]
12: Have a lovely weekend and I will send those probably...
00: Ok. Thanks everybody.
