
12: ... and then Mum said the other evening I will read something out to you...
00: That's is lovely. How sweet.  That's what you want. And did she read a poem or a...
12: Yes. And also erm...
00: Morning. Tea, coffee.
16: No I will just have water please if you don’t mind.
00: Cold?
16: Whatever, I don’t mind hot or warm.
12: I am here with a scarf and...
16: It's this room. The last time... it's alright it is cold outside...
12: We did miss you last week, but we had a good group.
00: I know yes it went well, she is wonderful Sophie isn't she.
12: John's not... he is... 
16: He has gone to London or something.
12: He seemed a bit disappointed didn't he but he had a long standing arrangement. 
16: Yes he has gone to London to see his... son or something he said to me.  He is good John, I like John.
12: Yes it's a nice group.
00: So Catherine do you want anything?
12: could I have tea please.  My mother is very well but sadly in the last 12 months, her memory has really, it is significant but it's just one of those things, but to have my mom reading this and the other books because my mother was such a reader and then to say well I will read you a poem. 
00: that is so lovely.
12: It is and she is reading it so.  
00: Would you like anything?
14: can I have one of those fruit teas please, thank you.  
12: We are wide awake because we have a nice walk across, well I think most of us do, across the park.
00: I really enjoyed that this morning. 
12: I do. Actually you know when you were at school, sorry for English A level we used to have...  poetry on a Wednesday and I hated it, hated it because the teacher was awful. I remember we did Keats, Ode to Autumn, seasons of mist and mellow fruitfulness... But it must stick because always in autumn, the verse comes into my head. It didn't at the time on a Wednesday but it did.  
14: thank you. 
12: But I think there is so much colour now because I distinctly remember it wasn't quite as colourful as this.
14: I think we have had quite a good autumn really though haven't we, like October wasn't that cold really.  Not as cold as it is sometimes.
12: I like all the seasons I know a lot of people don't, I like the winter too, I think when you get those cold mornings and in... when you have been out then you return inside and have got that rosy glow, or I do.  Just saying how lovely it is today on the walk.
13: It's beautiful isn't it?
12: Yes
00: would you like anything?
13: Oh coffee would be lovely thank you.  
12: Jane we had fairy cakes last week.  
00: Oh did you? Good so you will have to eat those biscuits has Grace has especially been and got them for you.  So last week it was Jane Eyre, enjoy it?
13: It was, it was very good.  
12: all the stories are good I mean the one about strange ladies, Miss Havisham, reminds me of an aunt we used to have to go and visit. She was very much like that.  She liked the company of men but she didn't like it whenever we went because we were young females and I think she felt that time had passed, I hated going.  She had a dressing table that was cluttered, absolutely cluttered of fine things but erm... you wouldn't dare touch especially the  things... oh I didn't like going.  
00: No its funny that feeling when you are a child, some relatives that you really don't like.
12: And her nails were always painted in a fantastic red, red lipstick and these nails always... but I was always I was sitting there rigid.
13: So that is a bit scary isn't it?
12: Oh it is, it is.
00: So who is missing? John is away and
13: Maureen.
00: Oh right, erm... is she on holiday.  I think there has been an apology actually...
16: It's not me this time.   
00: So this time it's an extract from Silas Marner and so continuing that sort of journey through life, erm... here is somebody who is erm... neither young nor old, page 107, but it's somebody in the middle of life and his life has gone wrong.  I will read the little introduction...
16: No thank you
00: Are you sure.
16: I can't get into my... I tried to get into my jeans the other day I was like oh... not a chance, but they are like a size too small.  
00: 107.  Silas Marner, I don't know if any of you have read Silas Marner, erm...
12: A long time ago.
00: Yes a lot of people read it apparently at school, and erm... I meet a lot of adults who don't like it because they read it at school, it was a bit like Keats you know it's like it is just not appropriate.  But when you read it as an adult it's very different and it's a very, very great moving you know powerful story, it is just not suitable for children so... so Silas he is a weaver and as it says in the little bit at the beginning has been forced to leave his own home and religious community, he is like a sort of very devout Methodist sect he was a member of, after being wrongly accused of theft and betrayed by his best friend. They did this thing where they erm... drew lots, to see who was the thief someone had stolen the collection and they said in the bible it says you can tell things like that by drawing lots, so they drew lots and his friend arranged it so that he got the lot that said it was you.  Bad. And he found out. So Marner suffers from a form of epilepsy which causes him to experience cataleptic fits from time to time so catalepsy is when you sort of go to sleep or you go absent but you are just still sitting there with your eyes wide open but really you are asleep.  In his anger, bitterness and loss of faith in everything he once held dear , he now lives along taking pleasure only in the gold he has accumulated, so he does the weaving for the village women of their linen and wool and sells his services and saves up all his gold. One evening he returns to his house and is devastated to discover that his precious horde has been stolen from its hiding place.  At the same time in a different part of the story, Molly Farron is secretly married to the local squires son and with whom she has had a baby daughter, she is an opium addict and as our extract opens she is attempting to walk to the squires New Year party through the snow carry a baby, she has got this idea she is going to turn up and say, I am married to him, you have all got to support me in my opium habit now.  So she is carrying her baby. She set out on the road inclined by her indolence to believe that if she waited under a warm shed the snow would cease to fall. She had waited longer than she knew and now, and now she found herself, belated in snow hidden ruggedness, of the long lanes. Even the  animation of a vindictive purpose could not keep her spirit from failing. It was 7 o'clock, and by this time she was not very far from Raveloe, the village, but she was not familiar enough with those monotonous lanes to know how near she was to her journey's end.  She needed comfort, and she knew but one comforter, the familiar demon in her bosom but she hesitated a moment after drawing out the black remnant before she raised it to her lips.  The demon is literally like a little bottle of opium that she keeps in the top of her dress and it's just a little phial like that, it's got very thick black opiate in it.  She hesitated for a moment, after drawing out the black remnant before she raised it to her lips. In that moment the mother's love pleaded for painful consciousness, rather than oblivion, pleaded to be left in aching weariness, rather than to have the dear encircling arms be numbed so they could not feel the dear burden.  I am not reading right today. In another moment Molly had flung something away but it was not the black remnant it was an empty phial.  And she walked on again, under the breaking cloud, from which there came now and then the light of a quickly veiled star for a freezing wind had sprung up since the snow had ceased.  But she walked alwyas more and more drowsily and clutched more and more automatically the sleeping child at her bosom.  So erm... I know the idea of the demon feels a very sort of old fashioned idea, for possibly thinking about an addiction, the demon drink and so on, erm... but that sense of don't know if you can imagine translating it into a modern context, but the idea of knowing you are choosing really between holding onto the baby but, if you take the thing,  if you drink it, if you... if you go with the addiction, the beauty of the relaxation... she will drop the baby and she knows that, she... it is as if those two things are in her aren't they?
13: I find it really striking because you are saying kind of that thing about a demon but it is almost a very, a very contemporary picture isn't it, we associate that more now with perhaps seeing  a heroin addict with a baby, it is striking that it's a woman, writing about a woman at that time. Although it must have happened of course it happened, because it seldom...
00: Of course yes, we don't really think of it but there was a massive, massive wave of opium addiction, gin and opium you know they were everywhere especially in the industrial cities.  Erm... so, erm... yes she needed comfort and she knew but one comforter and I mean I think that's one of the things that makes it feel contemporary that's... that feeling of erm... if you look at some of the young people who have grown up you know in our cities in intense poverty with no sense of aspiration or that life is going to turn into something, erm... what comfort is there, what is the comfort? So that, and she knew but one comforter, it just feels very, very real to me of erm... there are still these people, they are still in exactly the same place. The familiar demon in her bosom and I just wonder whether  partly as I said it's her dress but also do you think ... is that, almost like pointing to something in her.  
13: that's how I perceived it, that it was the... the demon inside her.
00: That was just sort of, give me, give me the comfort, give me the comfort.
14: Well when it said about her bosom and then it said about the child at the end of the paragraph as well, it almost makes you, when it said she knew but one comforter, it could well be the child before you read the next bit, so you know I think the way they have repeated that word makes it even more striking.
00: It's as if there are almost two alternatives for her as a young mom there is loving the baby and being loved by the baby, or loving the oblivion and wanting to go into it, erm... and they are right... both there and they are both in her.  Slowly the demon was working his will, and cold and weariness were his helpers. Soon she felt nothing but a supreme immediate longing that curtained of all futurity  the longing to lie down and sleep.  She arrived at a spot where her footsteps were no longer checked by a hedgerow and she wandered vaguely unable to distinguish any objects notwithstanding the wide whiteness around her, in the growing starlight.  She sank down against a straggling furze bush, an easy pillow enough, and the bed of snow too was soft, she did not feel that the bed was cold, and did not heed whether the child would wake and cry for her, but her arm had not yet relaxed their instinctive clutch, and the little one slumbered on as gently as if it had been rocked in a lace trimmed cradle.  But the complete torpor came at last, the fingers lost their tension, the arms unbent, then the little head fell away from the bosom and the blue eyes opened wide on the cold starlight. At first there was a little peevish cry of mammy, and an effort to regain the pillowing arm and bosom, but mammy's ear was deaf,  and the pillows seemed to be slipping away backward. Suddenly as the child rolled downward on his mother's knees, all wet with snow, it's eyes were caught by a bright glancing light on the white ground, and with the ready transition of infancy it was immediately absorbed in watching the bright living thing running towards it, yet never arriving.  That bright living thing must be caught and in an instant the child had slipped on all 4s and held out one little hand to catch the gleam but the gleam would not be caught in that way and now the head was held up to see where the cunning gleam came from, it came from a very bright place and the little one rising on its legs, toddled through the snow, the old grimy shawl in which it was wrapped trailing behind it, and the queer little bonnet dangling at its back toddled onto the open door of Silas Marner's cottage right up to the warm hearth where there was a bright fire of log and sticks which had thoroughly warmed the old sack,  Silas's great coat spread out on the bricks to dry.  The little one, accustomed to be left to itself  for long hours, without notice from its mother, squatted down on the sack, spread its tiny hands towards the blaze in perfect contentment gurgling and making many inarticulate communications to the cheerful fire. Like a new hatched gosling beginning to find itself comfortable.  Presently the warmth had a lulling effect and the little golden head  sank down on the old sack and the blue eyes were veiled by the delicate half transparent lids.  Just can't help but feel as I am reading that, the writer really loves that little baby ((laughs)) you feel she’s sort of enjoying every little fat pudgy finger don't you of it all. So it's interesting because George Eliot although her name is George Eliot, wasn't a man she was really Marian Evans and she didn't have any children of her own but she married a man who did have children and she sort of became their stepmom but she never would have had to do with a baby but I just can't help but feel she, there is something really loving about the erm... the little, really the observation I suppose of a very small toddler, all fours, up on its legs toddling along, reaching after it... Would someone else like to take up the reading? Would you?
16: I don't mind doing it.
00: You don't mind doing it, good, good thanks. 
16: If you want me to have a go I will have a go...
00: Yes I would like a rest while I eat my biscuit ((laughs))
16: But where was Silas Marner while this strange visitor had come to his hearth. He was in the cottage, but he did not see the child. During the last few weeks, since he had lost his money he had contacted the habit of opening his door and looking out from time to time, as if he thought that the money might be somehow coming back to him or that some trace of... some news of light, some of it sorry, might be mysteriously on the road and be caught by the listening ear, of the straining eye.  It was chiefly at night, when he was not occupied in his room that he fell into this repetition of an act for which he could have assigned no definite purpose.  And which can hardly be understood, except by those who have undergone a bewildering separation from a supremely loved object.  In the evening twilight, and later whenever the night was not dark, Silas looked out on that narrow prospect, round the stone pits, listening and gazing not with hope but with mere yearning and unrest.  
00: can I just stop you there.  About this erm... bewildering separation.  That feeling of, erm... don't know if yourself, or if you have seen anybody who has I don't know like, been robbed or erm... lost something very, very abruptly erm... probably thinking of things like my granddad when my nan died, erm... and you know he knew she had died but he did, he was very old himself and he did have this sort of air of a man who kept thinking as if, at any minute she will come back as if he just could not mentally process the absence, he couldn't, just couldn't really do that. Erm... but that feeling of Silas just as if he looked down the road it might come back ((laughs)) it is desperate really isn't it? An act for which he could have assigned no definite purpose, what are you doing I don't know I am just going to the door. Erm... but you might have felt that sense of bewildering so it's a good word. Lovely, keep going if you want.
16: Yes I might get a bit better as I keep going.  
00: Yes one warms up,
16: that's what it is,  yes. This morning he had been told by some of his neighbours, that it was New Year's eve and that he must sit up and hear the old year rung out and the new rung in.  Because that was good luck and might bring his money back again.  This was only a friendly Raveloe way of jesting with the half crazy oddities of a miser.  It had perhaps helped to throw Silas into a more than usually excited state. Since the oncoming of twilight he had opened his door again and again, though only to shut it immediately as it seemed all distance veiled by the falling snow.  But the last time he opened it, the snow had ceased and the clouds were parting here and there, he stood and listened and gazed for a long while. There was really something on the road coming towards them, then but he caught no sign of it and the stillness and the wide track of the snow seemed to narrow his solitude, and touched a yearning with the chill of despair.  He went in again, and put his right hand on the latch of the door to close it, but he did not close it, he was arrested, as he had been already since his loss by the invisible wand of catalepsy and stood like a graven image, with wide but slightless eyes, sightless eyes, holding open the door, powerless to resist either the good or the evil that might enter there.  
00: good, good, that was lovely you are getting a lovely rhythm up there.  Erm... what do you think of this then?  You had a little sort of wry smile at one point.
12: No I smiled because miser, it's a word but it doesn't really conjure up erm... it is misery really isn't it, you almost think it's someone that has wealth but they don't really...
00: Yes there is no pleasure.
12: No pleasure so that is why I smiled because I thought even the word itself and then when David read it out it, it summed it up really.  
13: I felt exactly the same he is heartbroken that it's lost, and yet it seems to bring him no joy, it said earlier his coat was an old sack... 
00: So yes he doesn't use it for anything in the previous bit, in the story before you get this you see him with it, it's as if, he can't love people or anything because he is so damaged by what happened in the previous erm.... place he lived, and he just... it's as if he just almost loves like the colour of it, he doesn't want to spend it, that would be, that would mean it would go away, erm.... he just likes looking at it and every night he gets it out and sort of touches it, and he doesn't even count it I don't think he just likes, he just loves it.  
13: So it's bringing him some sort of comfort.
00: So it's a sort of comfort yes, yes. Erm... so when it said that staying up for the new year was only a friendly Raveloe way of jesting with the crazy oddity, it's as if people are saying oh don't forget to stay up and etc... it might help you get your money back, but he is doing it, out of a sort of maybe it will.  So here he is then and he has gone into this, into the cataleptic state, and stood like a graven image with wide open eyes, standing there holding open his door, but gone.  Have you ever seen anybody who has had a state like that?
12: Yes I have.
00: Yes it's quite, if you are not used to it, it can be extremely disturbing to see and hard to work out what is happening erm... once it happened to us when we were on a day trip round the Roman things in I think in Chester but it might have been in York and the tour guide went into one, so he was in the middle... we were in a sort of basement looking at some stones of Roman days and about 20 people gathered round listening to him and he suddenly ((speaks really fast and slurred)) and he literally was like that and staring straight ahead, and everybody just stood for quite a long time as if to sort of say well in a minute he will just come back. But it was long, it was... and then somebody started saying is he ok, and then finally after quite a few minutes, he suddenly said sorry have I been away.  It was really... particularly in a dark sort of basement. 
12: You thought is this part of this...
00: Yes is it part of the show.  It was a very strange experience. But it was exactly that the invisible wand of catalepsy it was as if it just was like a shadow that had fallen over him. But interesting the language here, so holding open his door, powerless to resist either the good or the evil that might enter there.  So, anything could happen now while he is just standing there and the cottage door is open and he was, was he I can't remember properly now Grace can you remember, was he in a fit when the gold was stolen the first time, no he was just out?
17: I don't know
00: Don't know, can't remember.  Erm... would anybody else like to read.
12: Would you like me to?
00: Yes thank you.
12: When Marner's sensibility returned, he continued the action which had been arrested, and closed his door, unaware of the change in his consciousness, unaware of any intermediate change, except that the light had grown dim and there he was chilled and faint, he thought he had been too long standing at the door and looking out. Turning towards the hearth where the two logs had fallen apart, and sent forth only a red uncertain glimmer, he seated himself in his fireside chair and was stopping to put his logs together when to his blurred vision it seemed as if there were gold on the floor in front of the hearth... gold his own gold. Brought back to him mysteriously as if it had been taken away.  He felt his heart beginning to beat violently, and for a few moments he was unable to stretch out his hand and grasp the restored treasure. The heap of gold seemed to glow and get larger beneath his agitated gaze. He leaned forward at last and stretched forth his hand, but instead of the hard coin with a familiar resisting outline his fingers encountered soft warm curls, in utter amazement Silas fell on his knees and bent his head low to examine the marvel, it was a sleeping child, a round fir thing with soft yellow rings all over its head.  Could this be his little sister come back to him in a dream? His little sister who he had carried about in his arms for a year before she had died, when he was a small boy without shoes or stockings.  That was the first thought that darted across Silas's blank wonderment.  Was it a dream?  He rose to his feet again pushed his logs together and throwing on some dried leaves and sticks, raised a flame but the flame did not disperse the vision it only lit up more distinctly the little round form of the child and its shabby clothing. It was very much like his little sister. Silas sank into his chair powerless, under the double... sorry presents of an inex... [30.42] surprise and a hurrying influx of memories.  How and when had the child come in without his knowledge, he had never been beyond the door, but along with the quest... with that question and almost thrusting it away there was a vision of the old home, the old streets, leading to Lantern Yard, and within that vision another of the thoughts which had been present with him in these far off scenes, the thoughts were strange to him now, like old friendships impossible to revive and yet he had a dreaming feeling that this child was somehow a message come to him from that far off life.  It stirred fibres that had never been moved in Raveloe, old quiverings of tenderness, old impressions of awe, at presentment of some power presiding over his life. For his imagination had not  yet expedated itself from any sense of mystery, in the child's sudden presence. And had formed no conjectures of ordinary, natural means by which the event could have been brought about.
00: Let me stop you there that was lovely. Thank you very much, both doing brilliantly it's quite hard to read isn't it, it's got a lot of long words in and the sentences are very long...
16: that's why I struggle with the long sentences.
00: Yes you have to get the rhythm.
16: I don't read these type of... I have never read these types of books so it's completely different.
00: So it's quite a new thing. Well, I mean she is, she is a wonderful, wonderful writer but it is as if you have to, get into tune with her speed it's very slow, and very long and it's as if thoughts just pile up and up, very gently but you have both read really, really well so thank you.  Erm... but just to read over some of that again and erm... so, one of... as well as his sort of catalepsy he has also got very, he is very, very, very  near sighted partly because of being a weaver, and... hand loom weavers the end of the 17th century before the industrial revolution would often go blind because of you could... there was only daylight...
16: Because of the candle light.
00: and then if they had to work by candlelight and it's very fine work, and you are you know so he has already got, he can't really see properly anyway it was very fuzzy so that first moment of the gold, erm... is it back. So what do you think about when he sees that for the first time, and his very, very first thought he bends down on his knees to look at it, round fur thing with soft yellow rings all over its head, it’s on page 112, could this be and then you might have a 101 things but what comes into his mind is could this be his little sister. 
12: So his preoccupation of thinking about his money, has completely it has not even come to the forefront of his mind.  I thought the description of that was very... 
13: It was really good
12: It was, wasn't it, thinking it was initially his gold and then the memories of this little sister.  
00: Yes just very powerful.
12: Yes,
00: Yes very powerful erm...
13: It's kind of like building on that something magical is happening when he sees the child's hair and thinks it is gold is this the kind of, the real treasure he has been waiting for when...
00: Missing. Yes. It's got a lovely fairytale feel hasn't it?
12: It has.  You feel oh perhaps he is going to have happiness or... contentment.
00: Yes, what a lovely feeling. Though I feel like we are still quite a long way from it just at the moment but it's possible.
13: Even from when the child wandered in as her mom kind of went into this, because that's quite a dangerous moment really when her mom sinks into a stupor isn't it?
00: Yes, the child could have fallen into the fire couldn't she or into a...
13: Or she could have died in the woods, I am saying she, do we know if it's a she...  following this beam of light.  Even that's  a fairytale isn't it, in the woods, Hansel and Gretel kind of following the light to the wood and...
00: Yes it feels a bit like Tinkerbelle.  
13: Something terrible could happen to the child.
00: yes but it hasn't... erm... and then that very, very sharp memory and thinking about the sort of erm... like how contemporary it can be the idea of you know, you saying about it being erm... like a heroin addict with a child but thinking here of Silas as a poor boy in a city who had grown up carrying his little sister about in his arms for a year before she died, when he was a small boy, without shoes or stockings. So whatever that long past was for him, erm... very, very impoverished, very...
13: And how much he must have treasured his sister, to hold this child and carry this child for a year when he was so destitute and alone. 
00: Yes and he says a bit later it was very much like his little sister.  
12: and the way he sank into the chair, powerless he was almost erm... 
00: Yes he is overcome really by...
12: All the thoughts and memories.
00: So partly practical thoughts like how had the child come in, so he doesn't know that it was while he was away erm... but then all those memories also of his old life when he was part of the erm... of the sect, in Lantern Yard, where he you know he was in a community and people knew him and loved him or seemed to, erm... but along with that question and almost thrusting it away, erm... there was a vision of the old home, and the old streets, leading to Lantern Yard and within that vision another of the thoughts which had been present with him, in those far off scenes. I find that almost hard to get at, I am trying to imagine that for myself, erm... when I was a kid we lived in a pub off Upper Parliament Street, if I try and remember that now, it has been knocked down, you know, 30 years, erm... but trying to remember, I can remember it and I can remember sort of going to school and walking along Hope Street to Blackburn House, but trying to remember the thoughts, thoughts you had at that time, the only ones that I mean powerful thoughts maybe like when my nan died, those kind of thoughts, big that would stay, so the thoughts he is having... presumably were thoughts of like being connected or disconnected from that group of people he was once part of before he became the miser.  And the thoughts were strange to him now, like old friendships impossible to revive. Yes he had a dreamy feeling that this child was somehow a message come to him from that far off life.  Stirred fibres that had never been moved in Raveloe because all the time he has been in Raveloe he has been like I don't talk to anybody, I am just on my own.  I don't have anything to do with anybody.  He is not a bad person, or unkind or anything he is just completely sort of almost walled in.  
16: They are comforting as well aren't they, like a comforting when he is thinking of the child, thinking of his past, thinking of everything that is nice.
00: Yes
16: that type of thing.
00: Warm things come back to him and it feels very warm here by the fire and... even the fact that he has got a chair... sounds good doesn't it?
12: Positive.
00: Alright shall we go on? Don't suppose either of you two would...
13: I will. But there was a cry on the hearth, the child had awaked and Marner stooped to lift it on his knee. It clung round his neck and burst louder and louder into that mingling of inarticulate cries with Mammy by which little children express the bewilderment of wakening. Silas pressed it to him and almost unconsciously uttered sounds of hushing tenderness.  While he thought himself that some of his porridge, which had good cool by the dying fire would do to feed the child with if it were only warmed up a little.  He had plenty to do through the next hour, the porridge, sweetened with some dry brown sugar from an old store, which he had refrained from using for himself, stopped the cries of the little one and made her lift her blue eyes with a wide quiet gaze as Silas, as he put the spoon into her mouth. Presently she slipped from his knee and began to toddle about. But with a pretty stagger that made Silas jump up and follow her lest she should fall against anything that would hurt her, but she only fell in a sitting posture on the ground and began to pull at her boots, looking up at him with a crying face, that said her boots hurt her.  He took her on his knee again but it was sometime before it occurred to Silas's dull bachelor mind that the wet boots were the grievance, pressing on her warm ankles.  He got them off with difficulty and the baby was at once happily occupied with the primary mystery of her own toes.  
16: ((laughs))
13: Inviting Silas with much chuckling to consider the mystery too.  But the wet boots had at last suggested to Silas that the child had been walking on the snow and this roused him from his entire oblivion, of any ordinary means by which it could have entered or been brought into the house.   Under the prompting of his new idea and without waiting to form conjectures, he raised the child in his warms and went to the door, as soon as he had opened it, there was the cry of Mammy again which Silas had not heard since the child's first hungry wake. Bending forward he could just discern the marks made by the little feet in the virgin snow and he followed their trek to the furze bushes.  Mammy the little one cried again, and again stretching itself forward so as almost to escape from Silas' arms, before he himself was aware that there was something more than the bush before him.  That there was a human body and the head sunk low in the furze and half covered with the shaken snow.  
00: Thank you, lovely, lovely.  It is, I am seeing it today really erm... if it was a drawing or painting really got gold, gold, gold and black, black, black it's... absolutely extreme isn't it from one sort of bit to another. Erm...
16: When children cry for parents... they always seem to be looking out for their parents don't they?
00: Yes
13: the tenderness he responds to the child with is almost astonishing isn't it.  
00: It is a...
13: It's so tender and natural to him to do that.
00: Yes.  Erm... I love the fact that he gives the child the brown sugar...
12: Oh yes
00: which he hasn't used for himself, because he doesn't want to spend any money.
12: he is not even dismayed that the porridge that was for him, which normally he gives the impression, not at all he is thinking only of the child.  
00: And that moment where erm... her little eyes her blue eyes lift up with a quiet gaze at Silas as he put the spoon into her mouth, because everybody who has ever fed a little child that it's a lovely feeling isn't it to, you know to give that erm... and that again it's still this sense of how much the author loves the baby because that presently she slipped from his knee and began to toddle about, but with a pretty stagger, erm... as if even it makes you feel even as you are watching it, I don't know if I am just speaking as a besotted grandmother, 
12: No I think you can visualise how if a child starts to stagger you do... lean forward on your chair waiting for them... you are thinking what if they fall and often children will just fall back in the sitting position.
00: Yes they are more, they look as if they are not in control but they are,
12: they are. 
13: It's surprising to see that in him, it's a natural thing I know if you see a child out tottering across the park and if it's by the cycling path to try and stop it even if you don't know the child.  
00: It's part of our sort of species isn't it connection to all babies you know you just have to do that. But with a pretty stagger...
16: Unless you don't know people...
00: Yes well in which case it's very different isn't it.  So for the poor mom out there in the snow.
16: Just shows you how much it's taken it away doesn't it,
00: Yes so what she has lost and she had it right at the very beginning it was as, as a sort of possible alternative back on 108 she needed comfort but she knew but one comforter the familiar demon in her bosom but she hesitated a moment, after drawing out the black remnant before she raised it to her lips, in that moment the mother's love pleaded for painful consciousness, rather than oblivion.  It is, I think it's really interesting that the writer can pinpoint it down to almost, like a second, where the choice is made.  Erm... just thinking of, I am sorry to go back to my own biscuit problem, but remember that day when I met you in that cafe, and I was having a piece of cake, and I said well I have decided to have this cake because I have been trying to not eat cake and biscuits for absolutely ages, and erm... you know I am about 2 stone overweight and I really don't want to be I would like to not, I would like to not be but so in a very mild way of a sort of sugar addiction or maybe it's an addiction to cake and biscuits I don't know, erm... I am aware of that as a thing where a moment comes where whatever you have said to yourself in advance, however many times you have gone over it a moment comes and so I had it this morning with the fig biscuit which I took, partly out of kindness, and you know to enjoy the biscuits more, but partly erm.. because I have been up since very early and didn't have a very good breakfast etc, so and I did think shall I eat that biscuit and then yes I will. But there are other times when it is not as conscious as that, and it's just like somebody is passing through the office saying do you want one of these, and you just have a fraction where what is your inner battle, it is almost as if you haven't got... there isn't enough time to make a decision and then your instincts have done it and you have said...
16: You are thinking of the biting though aren't you, it's that...
00: It's almost well physical almost of before your mind has been in it and she is at that, has that moment of something in her absolutely knows that she loves that baby, erm... but it's, how long does it take it's a moment the mother's love pleaded, you know really pleaded for... not just the thought oh I shouldn't, but pleaded for painful consciousness rather than oblivion pleaded, to be left in aching weariness rather than to have the encircling arms benumbed so that they could not feel the dear burden. I think what... is brilliant about it is, it does acknowledge the mother's love. 
13: It's a very insightful way to write considering how long ago it was talked about addiction extremely insightful really it makes me wonder how she, 
00: How did she know, yes. 
13: and you know kind of, I think sometimes there is a misconception that people who are addicted don't love their children, they can't love their children because they do this and that's not the case at all but...
00: Yes and she knows that doesn't she it's... it is there.  And yet, in another moment it's as if the desire for the comfort that is at the beginning of that part, is too great, and you wonder how far back does that go to erm... and when you think of how Silas is comforted by the presence of the little child, and you think how it seems as if how far back it goes for him it goes right back to childhood.  He thinks of when he feels love he thinks of his little baby sister and at a time when he was so little, he didn't even, a small boy without shoes or stockings, street kid.   So what do you think is going to happen in this story then, they are... do you feel is mom dead by the end? Silas is, he is going to her carrying the baby towards her, before he was aware there was something more than the bush before him there was a human body with the head sunk low in the furze and half covered with the shaken snow. 
13: I thought so when he said body, not somebody there or that she is half covered in snow. I thought she is dead.
00: Yes she is dead.  And that is what happens so he, erm... you will be glad to know gets to keep the baby ((laughs)) which is a good...
16: You said about the writer looking after the baby, 
00: Yes, yes
16: I will find a place for you, you know...
00: Yes, yes here you go I will put you with him, he will look after you but also, in a way looking after him, because it is as if the baby toddling into the cottage hasn't just saved the baby, 
12: It's both.
00: Hmm...
13: that is the fairytale bit of it again isn't it, he leaves the door open and the child...[talk together]
00: I really wish there was more of this... wish it would go on it's not fair, that is not enough but we will go onto the poem shall we.  Erm... I mean I don't know I love Silas Marner.  Erm... now, Helen do you think you could... ok go on.
14: I am a millionaire, my bedroom is full of gold light of the sun’s jewellery, what shall I do with this wealth buy happiness, buy gladness, the wisdom that grows with the giving of thanks. I will convert a child's holding to the estate of a man, investing the interest in the child mind, beyond this room are the arid sluices through which the cash pours and the heart desiccates, watching it pass. Men draw their curtains against beauty, let me when night comes offer the moon unhindered entry through trust windows so I may dream silver but awake to gold.  
00: Thank you, thank you very much. Because I haven't looked at it since we read it a few weeks ago in the other group I had this suddenly in my mind as you started to read it as a very simple poem but now as you were reading I was thinking it's not at all simple it's really hard.  Erm... will someone else read it, read it again, give us another go. Would you like to have a go?
16: don't mind if you want.
00: I do yes.
16: I am a millionaire, my bedroom is full of gold light of the sun's jewellery.  What shall I do with this wealth. Buy happiness.  Buy gladness, the wisdom that grows with the giving of thanks. I will convert a child's holding to the estate of a man. Investing the interest in the child mind. Beyond this... beyond this room are the arid sluices through which cash pours and the heart desiccates , watching it pass.  Men draw their curtains against beauty, let me when night... when night comes offer the moon unhindered entry through trust's window so I may dream silver but awake to gold.Ok?
00: Lovely yes.
16: I try, I try.
00: No you do try it's very, very nice to hear everybody's different voices that is one of the things I really love about shared reading is you get the stuff in different voices.  Erm... what do you think of this one then, do you like it, do you feel attracted to it?  Do you feel worried by it? Give us a word.  
12: Well people always say, money doesn't buy happiness, and in there, buy happiness, buy gladness.  So this person has an amount of wealth but I don't think, it doesn't project a sense of contentment or happiness.  
00: Can you buy happiness? No.
12: Not at all.
13: I am not sure about it at all. Is the first half kind of referring to a child-like state because this is, gold and can you buy happiness and that child... the second part from the beyond, points a really different...
00: Yes a different feeling.
13: Sluices and desiccated heart and... 
00: Why do you think we get that change in language from the beginning feels as you say right down to the end of child mind, and that is looks as if it is exactly sort of half way doesn't it and then it changes.   That's made me think it's a bit like turning a coin over somehow that you have got two sides of a thing...  Rich RS Thomas.I am a millionaire, my bedroom is full of gold light of the sun's jewellery,  what shall I do with this wealth. Buy happiness. Buy gladness, the wisdom that grows with the giving of thanks.  I will convert a child's holding to the estate of a man, investing the interest in the child mind, beyond this room are the arid sluices through which cash pours and the heart desiccates watching it pass.  Men draw their curtains against beauty, oh let me, when night comes, offer the moon unhindered entry through trusts windows, so I may dream silver but awake to gold.I think you are completely right, Angela but I do think the last bit changes again it feels...
16: he still hasn't got enough.
00: I feel the end comes almost like back to the beginning but I... say...
14: I am not sure it actually mentions anywhere that he or she is rich with money, because like the second line, says my bedroom is full of gold but then the next word is light so it's, it could just be that he has, he or she has riches of some kind and that could be you know I don't know, love to give to a child or something like that rather than actual money. 
00: looking at a day like this and seeing the gold light out there erm... and wondering whether... can you see it the sun's jewellery.  It is lovely, so if it's that, if that, if we are not to take I am a millionaire straightforwardly if he just means I feel so rich.
14: Yes
00: If that, let's go with that and read it again and see how it... what else can you make of it then if that is the case. I am a millionaire.  Rich, let's have the title as well. Rich.I am a millionaire, my bedroom is full of gold light of the sun's jewellery, what shall I do with this wealth, buy happiness, buy gladness the wisdom that grows with the giving of thanks.  I will convert a child's holding to the estate of a man.  Investing the interest in the child mind.  Beyond this room, are the arid sluices through which cash pours and the heart desiccates watching it pass.  Men draw their curtains against beauty, let me when night comes offer the moon unhindered entry through trusts windows, so I may dream silver, but awake to gold.  I feel as I would really like to go through it very slowly, and get each little bit lined up somehow.  Erm... the first bit I don't feel... I  feel I don't understand is the wisdom that grows with the giving of thanks, so what does that mean? What shall I do with this wealth, buy happiness, buy gladness so if it is, if he is just thinking I feel so rich today erm... what shall I do with it, so if it's not real money, if it's just good feeling, gold feeling, what will I do with it. Buy happiness, buy gladness, so with those, if it was that kind of gold good feeling can you buy happiness with it, is it happiness.  Is it gladness, erm... the wisdom that grows with the giving of thanks, I did sort of I mean, I don't have a religious faith in any formal sense but as I walked through the park this morning I was very conscious that I was giving thanks in some unformed without words way because of the light I was just really, really glad of the sun.  And the colours in the trees and just thinking you know beautiful I am so lucky to be walking along this bit here.
13: It feels quite spiritual. 
00: Yes, yes
13: Maybe not in a religious way but some connection
00: and it did feel like thanks, although not addressed to anyone in particular but, erm... but what is the wisdom that grows?
16: that's the [01.00.57]
00: yes the bit that, yes...
16: It is instilling something in the child isn't it, that's what you buying isn't it or...
00: You get that with what with good feeling.  
16: From what Helen said I mean I would have thought it was the same, it was to do with money when you said it, it's, like an adult instils good values in the child, and the payback is how the child grows at the end of it and then you know... you may dream silver but
00: That is really interesting the child mind.  Yes.  
13: when you read it again after what Helen said, I don't... I am not sure why, why I kind of felt that but there was almost something about is it about loss of innocence, loss of childhood, because it talks about the kind of exchanging the child's holding, to the estate of a man.  
00: Yes, ok let's try and see what that means then because that is the next bit I don't understand.
13: and then beyond that room is this terrible image of acrid sluices, you know...
00: the world.
16: Yes  the bad things that are happening.
00: Bad world, 
13: And then you are right it does become hopeful again.  
14: but I think that bit about erm... beyond these rooms are the arid sluices through which cash pours it's almost as if it's saying with actual cash it all just kind of goes away and people would just watch it you know, just turn into nothing and whereas what he is talking about is actual you know whatever it is, something of value that isn't money.  
00: That makes you feel rich?
14: Hmm
00: It's interesting then that the title is rich because the meaning of rich as in money if you were a real millionaire and you had a lot of gold but also if you say, it was a really you know erm... it was a really rich experience it was  a really erm... you know my grandfather went to sea, he did this and he had a wonderful allotment, it was a really rich life, erm... rich I don't know really what... I would quite like to know what the world really means... going to look it up.   What the... where that word comes from, erm... 
16: You are investing in the child aren't you, investing in the interest of a child's mind.  
00: Yes or even in making your own mind, like a child's that is the other possibility I will convert a child's holding to the estate of a man, I don't know come to that in a minute but investing the interest in the child. If you invest , if I said I am not going to erm... be thinking like an adult but I am going to try and feel like a child as I go through the park I would have kicked up the leaves and where I can hardly do that now... if no one was looking maybe.
16: I seen a lady do it, a lady went past me yesterday and she was walking down kicking the leaves and everything I looked at her and it was just a big smile on her face.
00: that's lovely.
16: And she went, I just can't stop doing that.  It was erm... it was uplifting like.
00: Yes.  Etymology rich, what does it mean?  Erm... ok it's an old English word, so for our purposes it's a word that has been in our language for about a thousand years, [01.04.49] powerful, wealthy it's a Germanic origin, ultimately derives from the Celtic rishe(?) powerful, strong, powerful, great, mighty so it is an interesting word to have. You could think of it in worldly terms as you know I have a very fat bank account and I have got a big Daimler, and that is rich and it's a form of power,  but to lie in your bed on a very sunny morning and feel happiness, gladness, may be another form of and because of that conversion or whatever it is that happens, that does feel like a kind of power doesn't it, I will convert a child's holding, the word convert is making me think also of Rapunzel and those stories, it's a turning gold into, turning straw into gold that is what you do isn't it in that, in those fairy stories, er... if you turn gold light such as we have today...
12: It's so appropriate that we are reading this poem this morning when the outside is reflecting... 
16: You said that as soon as you walked in though.
12: no isn't it and the sunlight so we are fortunate that it's...
00: It is illustrated for us by, by the absolute window.
12: Yes
00: So what do you think I will convert a child's holding to the estate of a man means? What does the language there make us think about?
13: That kind of makes me think of financial things but using it in a sort of you know like  a sort of simile but for richness of life or mind but kind of holding an estate..
14: Yes
13: Converting it into interest, but I will invest, I will invest the interest, when you think of like interest you might make from the benefit you get from something back into the child's mind rather than... the adult mind.
14: I mean it could be like saying, erm... I will use the little happiness or whatever I have to kind of make a bigger thing whether it's himself or a child I don't know it could be either really depending on how...
00: Yes because interest in financial terms is what you generate out of money  you have already got, you generate more money and so it gets bigger doesn't it?
12: Yes
00: but if you could do that with good feelings if you have got lovely golden light in you, and you can turn that into interest that would be like, having more of it and then maybe you can give some of that away then can't you, like the lady who had a big smile you know who was kicking the leaves, she was doing that wasn't she?
16: A very big smile as I say it's... I mean, because she was happy it's like when you came in this morning you felt really good because you were walking through the park, it's the same thing, when you see people walk round with a long face on, you tend to... go... you know it tends to be like that you know.
00: Yes we copy each other don't we or we pass it on in some way.
16: but she just made me, she was as I say she was... she looked at me first and then she went, oh I shouldn't be doing that but then I went but you can't resist it and she went no I know and carried on then.  It made me feel good.
00: That is nice.   So she was converting a child's holding to the estate of a man, of an adult wasn't she it was like normally a holding is presumably some sort of property...
12: Yes
00: Because there is the word smallholding and so on, so if a holding is like something you can own, erm... and the estate of a man erm... 
16: could be getting rid of the money.
13: The estate is what you own isn't it, again it's that kind of image of financial, material wealth you use to describe...
00: Use to describe emotional life, erm... how a child's holding to the estate of a man so almost as if it's very hard to put that into other words.
16: See he might have money, but he is instilling knowledge into the child so when the child grows up the child can look after what he has accumulated.
00: What he has got.  So, on... in families where stuff is past on in that way, that is how it happens isn't it and so, parents would say oh you must you know, erm... hold the estate together, never sell anything off, keep it etc and pass it on from one generation to another, but if that is not about physical things, physical cash, but about good feeling, how you would pass that onto children, just thinking of Silas in the previous bit, erm... very first thing he does for her is... is sort of offer her comfort and taking the boots off that hurt her, giving her something to eat, that is gold in a way isn't it, that giving that lovingness. Erm... I don't know whether there is a child in this or whether it's just keeping the child in yourself.
14: I mean like a child's holding could be the kind of natural happiness that children have, and he is saying I will convert the kind of natural childish happiness to everything that I am as a man you know everything that I am now as a grown up.
00: Because we think we lose that don't we, we think we lose what children have that lovely innocent freedom to be happy or even to be enraged and upset... you know we, we lose that as time, but do you have to lose it, erm... and once you are aware of it, could you, could you decide to keep it and not to be childish but to translate it into your adult way of being. I love the moment of the lady kicking the leaves and you looking at her and the smile, because that is, it's as if a lot of that exchange is adult, 2 adults... but it has still allowed it and it allowed you to enjoy it and it allowed her to carry on doing it and... it would be good if we were doing more of that.
16: It tells other people that it's acceptable.  As I say [01.11.37]
00: Be a grown up yes. ((laughs)).
13: Mindfulness isn't it, it's about being in the moment I am just going to do this because I want to do it, and I guess children do because that's very much about the little girl, isn't it she is cold so she wants to be warm, she is hungry, her feet are wet, and that is how children think isn't it, I just want to attend to this right at this very moment. They are not thinking...
00: That's really, an interesting point I think in the Silas Marner because it is then as if she is making demands on him and they are demands of the present.
13: and he responds to them.
00: And he responds to them.  
13: Stops thinking about his money and...
00: It's not the past, it's not the money, it's something utterly real and... what has happened in the village is because most people are adults they have seen a very shy, quiet person who doesn't want to make eye contact, doesn't speak to them, and so they have responded by not speaking to him as adults on the whole do, whereas the child that just sort of says oh my boots are hurting... demands a different reaction from you doesn't it?  Erm... it is more instinctive, more straightforward, less adult in a way. Though he is doing adult kindnesses for her.  
13: thinking about kicking through the leaves as well because I loved doing that and my son did as well but my immediate thought when you said it, and the reason why I wouldn't do it anymore is because my mom would say don't do that there might be dog muck... ((laughs))
16: Yes, yes.
13: That  was the reason not to do it because you don't know what's under the leaf, a child won't think anything. But as an adult it's oh look don't do that because... and as soon as you said it that was the first thought that came into my head.
16: As I said that did cross my mind as I say, when she was doing it but... as I say it soon went when she just, when she....
00: She was just enjoying it. Yes. And that is lovely.  Erm... ok lets read it again to go back in shall we? Would one of you read it?
12: I will read it.
00: Thanks.
12: Rich. I am a millionaire, my bedroom was full of gold light, of the sun's jewellery. What should I do with this wealth, buy happiness, buy gladness, the wisdom that grows with giving of thanks. I will convert a child's holding to the estate of a man, invest in the interest in the child's mind, beyond this room are the arid sluices through which cash pours and the heart desiccates watching it pass.  Men draw their curtains against beauty, oh let me when night comes offer the moon unhindered entry through trust's windows so I may dream of silver, but awake to gold.
00: I still feel as if there is loads I don't understand. I am ok I think now up to child mind but beyond this room are the arid sluices through which cash pours and the heart desiccates... thought Helen gave a brilliant account of that when you pulled it up before.  Erm... so is it really just saying something like to paraphrase it, you know outside of here there is the wide world, and it's erm... it is horrible, isn't it, arid, cash, desiccates, those words are pretty damning so there is the world of money out there. We are having a lovely time in here, with a poem and it's... it's cash free ((laughs)) isn't it, but out there is the world of money and if you are trapped in that world it's a terrible erm... treadmill.  Erm... well ok fair enough but why do we suddenly get to men draw their curtains against beauty. Why do you think that line is there and where has the poet pulled it up from out of the rest of the thoughts that are in the poem?
14: I think because it follows that big long sentence about the cash and everything, it's saying that the men in that world, don't let the kind of happiness in you know they kind of shut themselves off from it because they are in that world of money.
00: Yes so their curtains although the image is of somebody actually drawing real curtains the curtains could be sort of mental,
12: so that's interesting Helen, so if they were, if they saw beauty that would show their vulnerability in [01.16.30]
00: Yes,
14: Yes. They are too caught up in the world of the money to open the curtains and see what is out there.  
00: It's funny that curtains are... they are not like metal shutters are they, they it's not as if they could... they could open quite easily and stuff could get through them, but still men draw their curtains.
16: It's like they act in a certain way, it's like you were saying... you know I don't see...
00: I don't look at that. Yes I am not looking.  Yes I am not interested.
13: It's brought me back again to what you were saying about the woman kicking through the leaves, that’s something I have drawn the, we don't do that anymore but you said... 
16: We then go oh that is stupid you know what I mean it's...
13: there could be something lurking underneath or you know it's a kind of, so it's you just don't see it but when you did it... 
00: It opened the curtains.
16: Yes, yes, 
00: So that is almost then like a kind of conclusion to the sentence that goes before, so erm... the beyond this room are the arid sluices through which cash pours and the heart desiccates watching it pass, it feels almost like machine at that point doesn't it, it's like, have you seen Charlie Chaplin's modern times where he is, there is all those huge cogs he falls into it and he is going round... it is like that, it feels like that as if he is trapped and then full stop. Men draw their curtains against beauty as if that's... it happens because of that.  That is why.  Then another full stop, oh let me... oh let me, when night comes offer the moon unhindered entry through trust's windows, so I may dream silver but awake to gold.  
16: That is weird isn't it? It is usually the other way round isn't it.
00: Yes
16: You always usually dream that...
00: Yes, yes.  
16: Or if you are aiming for something you are always aiming for the gold instead. 
00: Yes I can't understand that, I can't erm... oh let me when night comes, I don't know if when night comes is connected to the curtains because I am thinking of people you know as evening falls to night at a certain point, you definitely think shall we draw the curtains. Don't you if... you know especially November, December when it by 4.30 it will be going dark erm... I don't know whether when night comes means... like low moments, or literally at evening time or, sorry to say could it also be dying erm... or any or all of those.  Oh let me when night comes, it is like a prayer isn't it? Offer the moon. Is he saying I don't want to draw the curtains? Offer the moon unhindered entry, if you were inside, if we were in this room tonight, at 7 o'clock and we didn't have any curtains, the moon could well be shining in couldn't it, but normally in a domestic house, you do draw the curtains at about 5 o'clock a point comes where it feels more comfortable to think, we will shut the outside out because it's dark now.  It doesn't look nice seeing dark outside of your window.  Or... is that just me?
12: No, no.  
00: but it is that it's somehow safer to draw the curtains...  oh let me when night comes, but he is not going to draw the curtains.  Offer the moon unhindered entry through trust's windows.  So I may dream silver but awake to gold.  
13: I am more and more feeling that that is just about being an opening up to something if I open myself up to this, if I trust that I will wake whether it's literally wake to something better, if I allow possibility in, then I will wake to gold which is riches [01.21.16]
00: Yes so it's almost as if the moon would create the silver.
12: it would that's what, that is what I interpret.  
16: Then when you wake up in the morning the sun is the gold isn't it? That is the... that is the night before so it's don't get your hopes up and then hopefully in the morning it's... 
00: Yes and if you had left your curtains open all night, and the moon had been shining in, you would have been in silver, and then you get that really early morning wonderful, peaceful gold light that you get very early, it's lovely.  I am really enjoying this today, really, really enjoying this poem. I would like someone to read it again. Read again... go on... go on read it.
13: I am a millionaire, my bedroom is full of gold. Light of the sun's jewellery. What shall I do with this wealth, buy happiness, buy gladness, the wisdom that grows with the giving of thanks, I will convert a child's holding to the estate of a man, investing the interest in the child's mind. Beyond this, room are the acrid sluices through which cash pours, and the heart desiccates watching it pass.  Men draw their curtains against beauty, ah let me when night comes offer the moon unhindered entry through trust's windows so I may dream of silver,  but awake to gold.  
00: Lovely, lovely.  I was conscious as you read that the last sentence is long, because you I think it was you Helen said sorry it might have been you Angela, that the beyond sentence is long, which it is, but then as you were reading I was just suddenly thinking yes but so is ah let me because you kind of expect it to maybe to stop at trust's windows or you are waiting for a pause, but he doesn't let it pause he makes it keep erm... keep going.  How, I mean you can see why the editor Angie has put that poem with the Silas Marner but I wonder if there is anything else we would like to do to kind of connect the two up.  Of course he was piling up real gold,
12: He was. But then the connection of the young child, the light reflecting on the child's curls there resembled gold.  
00: so that's like the sun's, the suns jewellery in this.
12: Yes it is.  
00: Poem isn't it?  Erm... and he feels, something that is like thanks or because his reaction to the child is really, really complicated and interesting  erm... he is at first on page 111, absolutely erm... delighted and when you were reading it Catherine you read it really, really well at that point gold, his own gold at the bottom of 111. So it's a sort of amazing joy he feels and you can feel it in the pros, erm... brought back to him as mysteriously as it had been taken away.  Erm... and it's as if that lovely feeling  goes on to the child, doesn't it, he is not, as you might be, it is possible in a different story that he could have been really disappointed and just thought what it's not the gold, it's a child I don't know what to do with children I don't want a child in my house. How did it get here. 
12: but he doesn't think about the gold at all.  It had been central to his being until then. 
14: If you read that sentence with the knowledge of the fact that he lost his sister, it's like his sister had been brought back to him when it was taken away.
00: Even though he doesn't consciously think that, yes that's good isn't it. So the moment of trans... of transmutation or the miracle moment is on page 112, erm... he felt his heart begin to beat violently, and for a few moments he was unable to stretch out his hand and grasp the restored treasures, he is feeling it, it's come back, it's come back, it's come back. The heap of gold seemed to glow and get larger beneath his agitated gaze, he leaned forward at last, and stretched forth his hand, but instead of the hard coin, with the familiar resisting outline because imagine him picking it up and sort of holding the hardness of it in his hands, erm... his fingers encountered soft, warm curls, in utter amazement Silas fell on his knees...
16: It's what he has been looking for isn't it?
12: It would be yes.
16: His [01.27.00]
00: I am just also struck by fell on his knees.
13: It just feels almost like a religious thing like he is transfixed by something falling to your knees like a... vision.
00: Wonder or thanks or, erm... bent his head low so it's really kneeling isn't it, it's like a... almost a prostration erm... and bent his head low to examine the marvel it was a sleeping child.  A round fair thing with soft yellow rings all over its head. It is lovely that to his blurry eyesight those rings are a bit like the coins they are round, and golden erm... and straight no pause, could this be his little sister come back to him in a dream.  It's funny about the dream.  
12: Well he just cannot... imagine this is reality.  
00: Yes
12: It's too wonderful.
00: Yes, yes.  
12: and the joy.  It's...  he just cannot comprehend.
00: Yes
13: He can't and it does feel supernatural I think he said something earlier on, something about I have not formed conjectures of ordinary natural needs by which this event could have been... but then by the end he has come back to the reality of...
00: Yes that it is, 
13: This is happening, it's a real event.
00: It's funny as well that could this be his little sister coming back to him in a dream, his little sister whom he had carried about in his arms, for a year, before she died,  when he was a small boy, I hadn't concentrated on the actual carrying and I was thinking of the mother and the opium, and how her encircling arms were around the child, and the child is presumably were round her neck, and something of that same maternal really relation was in Silas with his baby sister when they were children, and that often happens in families, boy or girl with especially big poor families, and I speak from experience, where bigger siblings do look after the babies and it's, it does make both boys and girls feel maternal. Looking after the baby.
13: I feel really quite moved by that by how precious she must have been he carried her round and he has nothing. He didn't even have shoes or stockings on his feet.  But he carried this treasure...
00: yes this treasure lovely.  Yes, yes.  For a year that was a long year for a kid.  
13: Was that the first year of her life did she die when she was one, was she ill for a year.  But again this kind of thing of being alone, there was just him and the baby. 
00: Yes there is no sense of any adults there, nothing. 
13: but I think that, does that again that happened didn't it. Tiny children were orphaned and living on the streets and just trying to... survive
00: Fend for themselves, and for their siblings. 
13: all he had was this little sister, that was the only thing in the world.  
00: That was the first thought so, that darted across Silas's blank wonderment, lovely writing instead of saying mind, the first thought that darted across his mind, instead she calls it his Silas's blank wonderment as if his mind has gone. There is no mind involved in this, was it a dream, he rose to his feet again pushed his logs together and throwing on some dried leaves and sticks, raised a flame. The flame did not disperse the vision, it only lit up more distinctly the little round form of the child, and it's shabby clothing. It was very much like his little sister.  So that is the sort of, transition into reality isn't it at the beginning it's as if is it the gold, it... is it my sister, when this is really no it's not, but it is very like his little sister.  And now he is sort of back in reality how and... how had the child come in without his knowledge.  And yet the old memories it's as if that, thought of the sister has opened up everything that has been closed and I just want to dash back to the poem, beyond this room, are the arid sluices through which cash pours, and the heart desiccates, watching it pass.  And thinking of erm... like before the child came in when he only had the hard coins, though he loved them... 
12: that's monetary value but the... the pleasure, which he finds hard to describe is immeasurable with this young child that brings back the memories. They may be very painful, obviously his sister died but you almost thought it was erm... it was an image by thinking well throw more logs on to dispel the flames but it's... it was there.  He couldn't quite believe it.  
00: It is like coming back to life isn't it, it's as if it's him that is coming back to life.  Erm... and I am just thinking about men draw their curtains against beauty and he had a door and his door was open and even despite himself he left that door open, and so this thing happened. That is a bit like not drawing your curtains isn't it.  You dream silver...
16: It's like it says  round in the very first passage, bitterness and loss of faith in everything he once held dear so he had a certain lifestyle, you know what I mean and it's lost so he... it's like keeping the door ajar. And his money goes as well, so everything has gone.  
00: Yes and yet that is the exact point where, in this story, this is what is so wonderful because in many other stories of course this could all lead to spiralling disaster, but in this particular story oh, I really wish we were going to read the rest of it. I really would like to spend the rest of the day reading the whole of Silas Marner. 
16: I had forgot half of it, it was only when you was telling me that it come back I can never remember it so that's...
00: That's lovely.  What a lovely feeling.  I think we will call that a day for today can we have the forms please Grace.
12: We will be thinking about this when we are going outside, it's... perfect to be reading this, it really is.
16: I know. You know that story with the winding road. Everywhere I have gone, that  winding road.
00: Oh the two roads.  
16: Every time I have been somewhere and someone has mentioned  I don't know whether it's on a film or... and it's always these two roads that...  Thanks very much.
00: I heard a really interesting explanation the other day from somebody who is interested in brain, neuroscience about why that happens when you know like erm... that thing of erm... if you are getting new shoes you notice other people's shoes or if you are pregnant you notice pregnant women or, whatever...
16: Or buying a car and you see...
00: Yes you get that, you always see that car everywhere, well somebody said, this lady was saying to me that erm... our brains take in 2 million bits of information every second, but of course we can't possibly process that, in fact we can only process a 140 bits, so 2 million come in and we only pick 140 of them, and so if you have got something in your mind that is like new car, new car, that little filter will filter out and just think concentrate on new car, new car and that's why you see it, or you know concentrate on I am pregnant, I am pregnant, pregnant women it is as if because most of the time your mind is filtering stopping things.
13: I think we look for familiarities, look for connection don't we, we talked a bit about empathy before and that is understood now that that is kind of hardwired, 
00: Yes that we should make a connection.
13: To make a connection with...
00: And it seemed I mean it really seemed in the story didn't it, that talking about hard wired it was as if that baby had got through to some sort of elemental part of him.
13: cut through everything else didn't she...
16: Just shows you poems are not what they seem. You pick poems up and it's... once someone says something completely different.
00: Yes and you go off on one that was very good Helen, good twist of reading.
12: yes it was.  That is what is so useful with a group different people's interpretations and it's nice to discuss. 
13: It also means what it means to you on that day as well doesn't it. I am wondering would we have seen something different if it was raining and dull.
12: Yes I know, 
13: [01.37.06] lots of reaction to the outside wasn't there about what you...
12: Oh absolutely
00: And the story of the leaves was very important today. 
12: Yes.  
16: It is that thing again with the girl on the side of the road, when you don't notice nothing, I might have just walked and not even thought about it.
00: If you had had your curtains drawn, 
16: Unless you open yourself to see what is going on...
00: Yes.  
12: It's hard to believe it's one more session.  
00: So the question is really when we start again after Christmas and New Year, I am going to... I said to the other group I am going to have Friday mornings, keep Friday mornings free and still have  a reading group here, though it won't be anything to do with the research project but it's just very good for me to have that chance and I am going to share it with Chris who is The Reader's Managing Director, because we are both very, very busy, because if we do it together then if there is one week where one of us has got to go, the other one will still be here, but it's a good chance for us to also to be together because we hardly see each other...
12: [01.38.20]
13: So do people from the other group want to...
00: Will come, some of them will and some of you will I hope. So we will try and decide what to read, originally I had said let's read Great Expectations, but now today I want to read Silas Marner...
12: See each week it's probably that book, this book and then the other.
13: It made me think last week I wanted to read the Brontes.
00: I know exactly so there is so much to choose from but maybe what I will do, erm... I am having a couple of weeks off at the beginning of January, so it will probably be like the third week of Jan when we start, and maybe what I will do is bring some half a dozen of things we have read that we have all enjoyed and we will just talk about it that day and decide. 
12: We still won't come to a ((laughs))
13: that's what we did in the [01.38.57] group we read a bit of each thing and then we had a vote on what we wanted.
00: what did you choose?
13: Tale of Two cities. Which wasn't my choice but I am really enjoying because that is something I wouldn't read I know I wouldn't it's too... but I am loving reading it.
00: but the opening pages of Tale of Two Cities are as if they are designed to put you off.
13: Breathtaking. I think it's breathtaking the first...
00: Oh do you like it because I just think...
13: The very first chapter it's kind of really drew me in.
00: I... it may be different when you hear it read because I know I can remember opening it and just thinking, no I can't read that it's too...
13: Well school put me off Dickens I remember reading...
12: School does that on certain things, I said it before.
13: I can't remember what we were reading but I remember thinking oh I really don't like this, I never want to read it again but kind of I am enjoying read it in that way. Slowly in that way.
00: The number of adults  I have met, I mean it must be 100s, who said to me oh Silas Marner I read that at school it was horrible.  I just think it's one of, for adults it's one of the most wonderful books there could ever be... they shouldn't make 14 year olds read it.
16: But when you explain it though it's completely different than just... 
00: If it was just flat. Yes, 
16: I would just go, but that is what...
00: But I think that is really the case for lots of us it's as if in the group more happens than it happens if it's just you by yourself.  Yes that happens to me too.
16: See that's where I get the enjoyment from the way yous discuss it and everything and the way yous read it and you read it, 
12: That is just as important isn't it,
16: That's what I mean I get, that's, I mean I know it looks as if sometimes I am...
00: No it doesn't...
16: But that's why I get the enjoyment out of it as you say...
00: but it's lovely to hear those different...
16: If you give me a book I read it, and I put it down I don't take in, a lot of it so it's a better way for me to learn.
12: I feel this group we all erm... mix well and I hope the other group does too.
00: Yes I think so.  I think it will be nice.  
12: so we will go out, we will see the golden light. 
13: Something came up for me today as well because I grew up at the top of Smithdown Road, where it joins Parliament Street so I am kind of back with all of those round that area, in the 70s so I have got lots of memories of that which I wasn't expecting to have got today so.... 
00: I have got a photograph... 
12: Would you mind if I just leave a bit earlier, have a lovely weekend all of you.
00: thank you very much Catherine. 
13: Catherine see you next week.
00: Of where we lived erm... at Parliament Place it was just down past the Rialto on the, as you were going down on the right and on the corner was the Somali clubs, Somali social club and I have got a photograph that I got from the internet of the Somali being demolished, and you can actually see the, it's a big like Victorian terrace, like all the most beautiful buildings but it was really bad, where we lived it was terrible, it was a slum it was a real slum, and sort of this you just see the whole building is falling and when I stumbled upon that photo on the internet I.. I can't tell you the thoughts that went through my mind. It was... it was incredible...
16: Like Silas in that...
00: It was exactly like that it was... erm...
13: And it's changed so much hasn't it you know so much in kind of over the last 40 years, incredible amount of change has gone on.
00: I can remember when we first moved here and I would be sort of 12 you know, maybe... maybe 12 or 13, 1969 and somebody in the street took me to Granby Street, which at that time was before any of the demolition had happened, so it was a long street, with just loads of Jamaican and West Indian shops, and plantains and er... I mean I lived in...I had never seen black people I just couldn't believe it and it is very different to as it is now I mean people are dispersed now, but it must have been at that point everybody just lived on that street.  It was...
16: Like Manchester is the same when you go to Manchester,  when I worked in Manchester the Indian community and the Sikhs, like where we used to park we used to have a Sikh fella and he said you go to a certain part of Manchester and that is all it is, one road, he said all the Sikhs and everyone just lives down that one road.  
00: Yes people stay with neighbours or people from villages they have known or people from in Granby it would be different islands you know.
16: But if you go abroad it's the same thing you go to Spain or wherever, the British congregate in certain... everyone congregates where they think it's... you know where they are comfortable or...
13: but that area has changed particularly round there it's kind of, you know it really was a slum I suppose. I remember the flats, I remember them knocking the flats down [01.44.07] it was mud... we used to call it mud hills we used to go and play on it erm... and kind of, it's built back up I think it's been built up and knocked down again since then but also kind of erm... kind of the gentrification around that bottom part of Parliament Street or even that they have build new flats there. My mother wouldn't have believe...  she died in the early 80s that that would be a desirable place to live now it was kind of looking back on it then you know it's hard to imagine...
00: It was what it was yes.  You know on the sort of corner of the Rialto there is the Rialto on one side and then there is a very big Victorian House on the Catherine Street side, when we first moved here in 69 and almost my entire life, up until a few years ago,  that was a derelict building and you pass it, it's a beautiful big chunky early Victorian mansion and trees used to grow out of it, and now it's lovely...
16: Like that church isn't it, like that church.  
00: It's amazing.  
13: People seeing the potential.  Of course the Rialto burned didn't it[01.45.15]
16: Helen is like that... 
00: Go on you old people...  ((laughs))
14: It's interesting to hear.  
00: Yes the Rialto burned down in the riots it was an old cinema but in those days, in my day it was a furniture warehouse. Way back.  
16: You see well [01.45.38] used to live round the corner from where I live.
00: Oh did he?
16: But is erm...
00: but they still have that church at the top of Upper Parliament Street don't they?
16:  I don't know if they do or not.
00: Is that there on the left.
13: Yes that's still there yes.
16: but I don't even know this area even though I have lived in Liverpool this area was just, Toxteth and this area I would never come over this side.  
00: Yes just off the map really.
16: Just it's my I live in Huyton but the only thing I know of Liverpool is going from Huyton to the city centre, I don't go to Kirkdale or that way or and as I say I never went to Toxteth so my thing is just that's...
00: just like a straight route. 
16: Yes. Over this side of Liverpool I have never ever known. I mean apart from a few  years ago.
00: I think I have that relation to the sort of Kirkdale side of the city where I just think... no idea.
16: the only part I know about Bootle is going to Southport.  Going through Bootle to get to Southport that is all I knew.
13: We were the same  unless you have relatives there or you know you had no call to do go there  did you unless the bus passed through it on the way to town you couldn't see it through the window... 
16:  I can't even work out north and south Liverpool it doesn't matter how many times you tell me north and south Liverpool I can't...
00: You don't think of it like that?
16: No.  It's just Huyton to  Liverpool that's all I know.  
00: that is the other way it's east and west isn't it.
16: I know Toxteth is over there, I know Calderstones over that side and Bootle is over that side, so I don't know the north and south and people come from outside Liverpool that is how they speak north south and I am like, they can't believe it. 
00: where did you go to school then?
13: we lived there until I was 9, and I went to St Hugh's Catholic School on Earl Road.
00: Oh Earl Road 
13: and then we moved up to this end of the city.  And I went to St Austin's school and then I went to [01.47.30] which was a Catholic Grammar school. 
00: I think my brothers probably went to St Hughes in Earl Road because we lived after the pub we lived in Smithtown Road opposite where the Asda is now, and I am pretty sure it was, I was I don't know I wasn't paying attention by that point but I think...
13: that might have been the nearest Catholic school to down there.
00: Yes it will have been. 
13: We lived at the top of Smithdown Road at that time.  
00: Long ago, far away.
13: It does seem like.
00: Lovely session. Need a little sit down in the Japanese garden now do you know that place.
16: I hadn't been no until Angela mentioned it to me, it was I used to moan about it that I didn't know it was there and Angela said go and have a look.  
13: Well that's it, you were walking past it but...
16: That's what  I mean.  Angela said just go and have a look.
00: It's very nice in there isn't it?
16: yes it is.
00: Beautiful, meditation garden.  
16: You know when you are reading and I am sitting here and I am smiling it's because I am enjoying it you know...
00: I know.  
16: [01.49.20] it looks as if I am laughing it's the characters I like.
00: No I am glad you are enjoying it. Never think anything like that.
16: No when I first came last time and I was sitting here and I could tell you could see I was laughing but that's what I do when I enjoy it. 
00: Good, I am glad.
16: Thanks very much.
00: bye.