00: I’m just going to stop there for a minute and see what you’re thinking so far. Because we’ve talked quite a bit about old people during these sessions and suddenly now we’re getting something directly from the voice of somebody. Interested? Not interested? What are your thoughts?
12: I think it’s very profound, I think as you’re reading this, you’re thinking this is actually happening. 
00: To people we know?
12: Yes.[18.55]
12: And the description of the care staff shall we say, it’s er, very true. 
00: So we all would recognise the young guy in the t-shirt who’d be friendly and cheerful etc, and that’s great to have a bit of that. But that general feeling of even Lucy, ‘but I could tell Lucy wasn’t really listening’. ‘They get that look, even the brighter ones, that nursery-nurse smile, which says “I know better”.’ I’m very conscious of that with my mum-in-law at the moment. She’s 80, can’t remember, I want to say 85 but it could be 87. Can’t remember. And that sometimes I find myself wanting to be, you know like sort of “oh mum”, be bossy in a sort of way, as if dealing with a child, but then keeping remembering this is not a child, this is somebody with you know a good two-thirds more life experience than me. No, one third. But lots, lots more. But the balance between a respect for that, and the appreciation also that in a sense they do need looking after. One of them is blind, one of them is in a wheelchair, she’s been in it for a long time. So those failing bodies in some sense[20.55]
11:  And it’s also about institutions isn’t it. Part of the whole power of the story is about institutions, and the way institutions variously constrain you and limit you and second-guess you really. Every institution you’re ever likely to be in will do that. But a retirement home will certainly do it. 
00: I think that’s in a way one of the scariest things for me about a retirement home or  a care home is that feeling of it is your home, but it is also an institution. And she picks up on that doesn’t she when she says, at the top of 410, ‘I’m not saying it’s a bad place, it’s just so ordinary’ …[23.05]
00: I’m thinking about being in hospital, when I had my second child I was in hospital for about, I can’t remember, two, maybe two-and-a-half weeks, which was long. Even in my day it was to like get you in, and get the baby, and get out. But I’d had a complicated caesarian and I was in for a long time, and I’m a completely        non-institutional person. I don’t respond well to institutions. And yet I think you        know within a few days, it’s as if the power of that routine is so, it feels like a huge        sort of, you’ve got to be in it, you couldn’t not be. 
15: You do actually adapt quite easily when you’re put into those situations. And it can be scary to come out of those situations if you’re vulnerable, you’ve had an operation or. 
00: Yes that’s right so you would even more kind of need it, you know.
11: That’s true and it raises questions about what is the proper behaviour for people who work there. When I was a student I worked in a care home during the vacation. I saw myself initially as being the one who was going to be different, the one who was going to behave really sincerely, properly. But in fact routine simply takes that out of you, you start to conform to not a bad stereotype 
00: but an ordinary
11: Insincerity, routine breeds insincerity.[35.50]
12: [after reading] Well I like this, this is excitement. They’re getting their own individuality and excitement of what they want to do. I think it’s marvellous the way she spoke about the magazines, and how she looked at these and longed for them and you’re thinking go on, do it. [39.40]
16: It was nearly lunchtime when we arrived in London Kings Cross. It was much bigger than I had imagined it. All glass and glorious grime. I tried to see it as well as I could, whilst directing Hope through the crowds of people, of all colours and ages. For a few moments even Hope seemed disorientated, and we dithered on the platform, wondering where all the porters had gone. Everyone but us seemed to know exactly where they were going, and people with briefcases jostled against the chair as we stood trying to work out where to go. I began to feel some of my courage erode. Oh, Hope, I whispered, I’m not sure I can do this any. But Hope was undeterred. Rubbish, she said, brazenly. There’ll be taxis, over there. Where? Where the draught is coming from. She pointed to our left, where I did see a sign, high above our heads, which read Way Out. We’ll do what everyone does here, we’ll get a cab. Onwards! And at that we pushed right through the mess of people on the platform, Hope saying Excuse me, in her Cambridge voice …[46.00]
12: In fact you’d almost like to say grab a basket, and just take whatever off the shelves. It’s like I suppose going into, there’s just things that they have enjoyed, visually, and also the smells was just a delight.
13: It’s a huge sensory experience isn’t it, smells, sights, tastes, 
00: Colours
13: compared to the blandness of what they’re used to.
12: An Aladdin’s Cave.
13: That really struck me as well about the way she reacted to the smells, if all you ever smell is disinfectant[57.30]
00: [Angela reading] Can I interrupt you there, I want you to carry on, but I’m just interested in ‘No one said it might be unsuitable’. And I’m just thinking the difference between being a free agent with money in your pocket, who can do whatever you want, and being somebody of any age really in an institutional setting who can’t do what they want. That nobody in a bookshop or even a library would say to anybody coming in ‘that’s not suitable for you’. So why do we think we can do that in another setting?
11: I think it’s part of the power relationships of caring. I think caring’s a really quite complicated idea, and it involves looking after the benefits and positives of a person, but it also involves some constriction and restriction I think. And it just depends how it’s professionalised. But it’s often professionalised negatively. I think in personal relationships caring for someone can start to become a constraining activity by you. A lot of personal stories about that. [59.30]
00: I don’t know whether it’s to do with the taking away of adulthood from old people. My friend Brian, he was my teacher at university and he’s now 78, and last week he said to me, well we always have tea together on a Friday. He said oh I haven’t been putting the heater on in the hall because of the cost of electricity. And I was just thinking to myself, bloody hell you’ve got plenty of money. Don’t you know that old people are freezing to death in their houses, you could be one of them, that would be terrible etc. But if he was 45, and had said that to me, would I have reacted differently, or is it like thinking oh you’re getting old now. [01.00.50]
00: In Brian’s case, if he was 45, would I just think you’re an idiot, but it’s none of my business.[01.01.05]
00: And why do old people become obsessed with saving money, as he has.[01.01.40]
00: But three years ago he wasn’t talking about saving electricity and I just did wonder is that getting old.
11: Yes I think it probably is. It’s a move towards a level of obsession.
00: Of certain things.
11: I think so, I think that’s true. I mean I’m 70, I’ve hardly got to that stage yet but I can see the tendency. You know I think that you have to watch it. And then other people around you, as you get progressively through you know your late 70s I suppose think you are no longer able to be the best judge of your own interests.
00: Yes, so is that the interesting place.
11: And that’s the kind of replication of the relationship with a child, and that’s where the tension starts. And I think even people who love you very closely like my son and daughters will probably start to say Hey, dad. I shall tell them off, I’ll say shut up! I know what I’m doing. Look after your own bloody life. [01.03.25]
11: I think a lot happens actually in people’s perceptions, speaking as someone who’s just crossed 70, I think a lot happens between the sixties and the seventies, and you start to be moved into another category by people, don’t you. And even people who don’t know you, on the train and on the bus. [01.12.05]
16: It’s surprising how quickly she becomes negative though doesn’t it when she’s taken out of the environment she’s used to. Because when she’s in the environment at the home she’s very confident, with like the nurses and all the people in the home but when you take her outside, and she’s in the street she’s worried about the person looking at her, being in a wheelchair, everything.
00: That’s right, twice outside she’s worried about the crowds at the station. I hadn’t noticed that until you’d said. 
16: When you mentioned she was really confident, outgoing, she’s worrying about absolutely everything. I think, that’s what I get from it, see. 
13: Outside she realises she’s vulnerable.
00: Yes. That’s right, and that’s sad and true isn’t it. Often when you’re out of your comfort zone whatever it is, you find it a bit difficult. But given that then, that she’s still managed to, or at least her friend has managed to get her in the shop, in a way it’s good that she’s in a wheelchair because it means that she just pushes her in, doesn’t she. Onwards urged Hope, in her Cambridge voice. Unsuitable barked Hope scornfully and wheeled me in anyway. It’s as if you need somebody at that point to go, literally. And probably we do all have moments like that where even though we’re not in a wheelchair it’s as if you still need somebody to kind of
16: Oh all the time. All the time.[01.16.50]
11: It’s interesting that what they do on their little adventure takes them to the kind of farthest end of consumer goods. It’s absolutely astronomic contrast.
14: But I think it could have had the same effect if they hadn’t gone right to the extremes.
00: And they had just gone to
14: Yes, because it reminds me of a time when I was in hospital a couple of years ago, and there was me and another girl and we had both been there for a long time, and we somehow convinced our doctor to let us both out for an evening, like alone.
16: Red shoes here we come.
14: We got a taxi and went to the cinema, and had Ben and Jerry’s icecream, and had real tea, made with you know caffeine teabags as opposed to decaf teabags, and then got the taxi back, and it was like the biggest thing. And it was like the first time that we’d been out at night-time, in ages!
12: And how old were you Helen if you don’t mind my asking.
14: Erm, 19?
12: So of course, yes.
15: It’s the experience … of being out
14: And it’s not even you know a big adventure, but for us at that time when we had been in hospital for a long time, it was huge. [01.19.20]
15: Maybe Catherine what you’re possibly going to do with the commission would be if you were visiting somewhere you would kind of inject some freshness into places, because they become so grey and stale. And maybe that would be part of what you would do. [01.42.05]
13: [talking about the line ‘how Love fled’] Yes it doesn’t feel like a huge revelation it’s like a kind of soft sort of if only, if only I had done something differently …
00: So it’s almost as if in ghost writing if only is somehow on the page really, it’s nearly a thought there.