I:	I will start then, so welcome everybody to this reading group and thank you for coming along and taking part. I haven't brought a pen with me, I always struggle to remember everybody's name, you have to keep telling me your name.

Frank:	Frank.

Mike:	Mike

Liz:	Liz

I:	Lynsey I know, 

Gerry:	Gerry.

I:	Frank, Mike, Liz, Lynsey

Gerry:	Gerry

I:	Gerry blonde hair.

Anne:	Anne 

I:	Anne short hair, interested in history Anne.  Ok you will just have to help me with that as it goes along. Got terrible short term memory.  Erm... I was planning to read a short story today but we haven't really got enough time, so I thought we would just do a poem.  Erm... but also saying of time I haven't got a watch.

Anne:	I have its 10 to.

I:	Could you possibly let me borrow your watch, I promise not to do any erm... Tommy Cooper on it. Thanks. So we are going to stop at 11.30 aren't we?

Gerry:	Yes that's fine.

I:	So that it will be right. Ok so in this book here if you would like to have a look.

Lynsey:	I thought we had till 12 this week.  Graham said we could... so Graham said we could [01.25]

I:	[talk over] I know you have got to go....

Lynsey:	 half hour because we had to fill in all the forms.

I:	Ok we will see how we go, might finish early.  Erm... you have got one... erm...  we will see how we get on and then if we still are going and you have got to go, we will just... you can just slip out.

Gerry:	I need to go at 11.30 as well.

I:	Oh right do you, well in which case shall we aim to finish at 11.30 even though... perhaps the rest of us should carry on I just don't know what to do for the best.

Frank:	Might be an idea.  

I:	Just to carry on until 12, alright. So we will see how we go so I thought we would start by reading what page is that on?

Frank:	It's page 75. 

I:	75.  I am... by John Clare.  I know the heading is identity loss, but I am not sure that is what this poem is.  So I thought what we will do is, I will read it out, and then just erm... let it sink in a bit and then I will read it again or ask if anybody else would like to read it, hear it in a different voice and really just let anything come into your mind that comes into your mind and as we go, we will talk about it if we think we have got things to say and if not we will flick through the book and find something else.  I picked this one because erm... [pause] I am very fond of it. I am.

	I am, yet what I am none cares or knows.  My friends forsake me, like a memory lost.  I am the self consumer of my woes, they rise and vanish in oblivions host, like shadows in love's frenzied stifled throes, and yet I am and live.  Like vapours tossed into the nothingness of scorn and noise, into the living sea and waking dreams where there is neither sense of life, or joys but the vast shipwreck of my life's esteems.  Even the dearest, that I love the best are strange nay, rather stranger than the rest.  I long for scenes where man has never trod, a place where woman  never smiled or wept, there to abide with my creator, God and sleep as I in childhood sweetly slept.  Untroubling and untroubled where I lie, the grass below, above the vaulted sky.  

	So that's it, I am by John Clare.  And written quite a long time ago, don't know if you feel the language is hard to get at erm... we will perhaps talk about some of that as we go along make sure everybody understands it but you probably got a rough drift of the poem.  And if you want to say anything just speak up.

Anne:	I just, I just its that word, it's the erm... in the first stanza where it says love, loves it just seems a different thing than the rest of it, because somehow it doesn't, when you think of love, you immediately think of romantic and... and... and it doesn't seem... it's... it's a different ballgame when they start bringing that in and yet it doesn't seem like that because it seems [pause] in the... I don't mean in the poem itself but it seems to stand out differently from the rest of the poem, because it's a different thing because it sort of, even the dearest that I love the best you imagine that's family while love is you can imagine is love romantic love and it just... 

I:	Ok we will come back to that, keep thinking about that. I don't know if anybody else thought you know... shuddered at that word.

Sue:	It didn't strike me but it is, it does imply turbulence, doesn't it?  

I:	So just try and notice then what you feel or think as it goes along, I will read it again.  

	I am.

	I am yet what I am none cares or knows.  My friends forsake me like a memory lost.  I am the self consumer of my woes, they rise and vanish in oblivions host, like shadows in love's frenzied, stifled throes.  And yet I am and live like vapours tossed into the nothingness of scorn and noise, into the living sea of waking dreams, where there is neither sense of life or joys but the vast shipwreck of my life's esteems.  Even the dearest that I love the best are strange, nay rather stranger than the rest.  I long for scenes where man has never trod, a place where woman never smiled or wept, there to abide with my creator God, and sleep as I in childhood sweetly swept.  Untroubling and untroubled where I lie.  The grass below, above the vaulted sky.  

	So love comes in twice, once in the first verse or stanza one in the second...

Anne:	I...

I:	And they seem a bit different don't they?

Anne:	I well sort of when you sort of... when you read the... carrying on from the loves there it is obviously the love act sort of stifled throes that's what, frenzied stifled that's what that is I think. 

I:	Seems to throw that image into your mind.

Anne:	Yes, yes. But the fact... the bit I find most disturbing is the third stanza where I long for scenes where man has never trod I just find that totally disturbing and a sort of emptiness and barrenness and completely... I can... 

Sue:	oh I don't feel that at all

Anne:	[talk over] I can never... you don't think so?

Sue:	[talk over] I love that one, that makes me want to cry but not in a bad way.  I think it's really comforting.  

I:	A place just... sorry you were going...

Liz:	I was going to say I found the second is it stanza is it?

I:	Stanza it means verse or set of lines.

Liz:	It actually because with the first you are left a bit you are not really knowing what he is talking about, but the second especially once you get even the dearest that I love are best, are strange nay rather stranger than the rest it then explains what for me, what is going on and then it you know I... it's a bit sad in that and then...

I:	It is yes, but that, then what that longing that comes out of that I long for scenes where man has never trod, Frank you said you felt it differently...

Frank:	Yes I felt it was just... I am not a great person into poetry it certainly did something and touched me I have got to be quite honest yes.

I:	At that point?

Frank:	At that point yes.  

Sue:	And me too.

Gerry:	I think the last verse is very spiritual, imagine it being in church because they mention the vaulted sky, so I find that very tranquil at the end it's as if all the problems and disappointments of life are left behind and you can float on up into this beautiful quiet...

Liz:	I get the impression that he is actually looking... looking towards that as well, 

I:	Yes

Liz:	As well as thinking the shipwreck of his life that obviously... all his dearest are getting strange to him and that's his... it is like a positive sort of end that he is looking to that rather than total despair it doesn't, there is no total despair there.

I:	I wondered if people felt the emotion was despairing because I am conscious as I am reading it...

Mike:	It's like he is depressed isn't it, he is talking about...

I:	He seems depressed yes, yes.

Mike:	the symptoms of his erm... malady, well his depression.

Sue:	But there is longing in the last stanza.

I:	But can we just stick with depression, with depression feeling for a minute, where do you think we are picking that up from?  Like can you give me any words that...

Mike:	Well he said his friends forsake him doesn't he so that's like a symptom of thinking...

I:	Feeling, nobody... no one wants to be with me. Yes, my friends forsake me like a memory lost.

Frank:	And also I am the self consumer of my woes. 

I:	Yes, yes.  I am the self consumer as if, sitting there...

Frank:	Stabs at self... stabs at self pity really doesn't it suddenly and...

I:	Yes, I am sad and I am going over it, and I am going over it, and I am going over it.  

Anne:	And then like vapours tossed I mean you know just nothing, and it's you know... it doesn't matter that you are whatever before it just is, just nothing. 

I:	Gone into the nothingness of the...

Sue:	The vast shipwreck isn't it, that gets me.

I:	Does it upset you, sorry.

Sue:	His life's esteems its massive. He has written this poem. So much about his life [11.36] read it now but...

I:	Did he, as he wrote it.

Anne:	Yes you feel that that, when it come to the vast shipwreck of my life's esteems you feel it is coming into a particular story there, the rest of it is his... is his emotional feeling but there you feel you are touching on something that you might explore more of what it could be, when he means the shipwreck instead of just because even children can feel down, but that feels that there is a past to feel down about.  

I:	The vastness of the shipwreck I don't know if like in my mind I do get a very strong image there of a sort of, almost like a wooden ship... a hulk, a sailing ship,

Gerry:	Yes

I:	 but I suppose a bit like Mary Celeste or something like that just with nothing, nothing on it, nothing moving just floating.

Anne:	That isn't a shipwreck ((laughs)).

I:	No it isn't but so why am I thinking...

Sue:	It's about to be. 

I:	Yes...

Frank:	It comes down to emptiness really doesn't it?

I:	Yes and I think that is what I am getting the feeling of.

Liz:	I think I find, I found because I you know... because straight after you got that his dearest were sort of getting stranger and stranger to him and it's probably, a shipwreck is that you know it sort of ties in erm... trying to explain what I am trying to...

I:	Ok so that fact of his dear ones getting stranger and stranger in a sense that's possibly the hardest thing isn't it that, that we could experience.

Liz:	Like his life which he knew is crashed on you know... it's...

I:	Yes it's broken.

Liz:	Broken 

Gerry:	And it's a dramatic word shipwreck isn't it, it's not saying oh the ship sank, it's a shipwreck which gives you an idea of stormy seas and thunder, lightning and then this great hulk disappearing suddenly beneath the waves very dramatic.

I:	It's huge isn't it, very noisy yes. 

Anne:	But then you have got erm... my life's esteems as if thinking about the erm... we think immediately that it's his life, but his life esteems is it things that he has cared about not just, not just him and his feeling of my life is a shipwreck but is it other things that my life's esteems that it's that slightly different.

[Lynsey leaves]

I:	The things I have esteemed are broken.

Anne:	Yes not just my own life and my mistakes but things that he has cared, the people he has cared about he has been disappointed in them.  Because then it goes on to say that I love the best, a stranger, nay rather stranger than the rest so...

I:	So everything...

Liz:	When I read that I thought he was, he... that he had like dementia or something or something where it is affecting his vision of you know and his memory of those people, that's how I read it. 

I:	And that's a real possibility isn't it, sometimes and I don't know if everybody has felt this but certainly I have, when you are in a bad way and even just sort of walking down the street you can kind of be thinking oh yes, you don't feel like I feel ((laughs)) I feel separate you know I don't... 

Gerry:	Yes, yes

I:	whereas normally I feel quite a connected person I make eye contact or I will just be thinking hello or something but on a very bad day, where you kind of think yes I am not like any of you people on this bus.

Gerry:	People say that when they lose a job, and then suddenly because they have had this place in society and then they feel suddenly different to everybody else, I have heard people say that.

I:	Yes and you are sort of dislocated.

Gerry:	Hmm

Anne:	Or when there is a death [ talk over]

Liz:	[talk over] there is stigma about it in a sense as well, you know tapped on.

Gerry:	The sense of identification has gone and...

I:	And did you say a death?

Anne:	When there is a death then you know, everybody is carrying on as normal and you know this has happened in your life and just nobody seems to be aware of it or know about it, and that is very strange. 

I:	And that same thing of the... of the loss of a job would be that funny feeling of walking around the streets and everything has changed for you but they are all still going to Tescos or... I heard a man on the radio yesterday who had been a whistle blower at work, 

Gerry:	Oh ok...

I:	And lost his job because of it and erm... it was in a planning department of a city council  and one of his colleagues had bought a piece of land with protected trees on it and erm... and started cutting the trees down, and he said I said to my boss he has bought that land we all know about it, it is protected and he is cutting the trees down he is going to sell it to a  developer... 

Gerry:	Oh

I:	and they all sort of said no he is not... ((laughs)) and then of course he tried to sell it to a developer ((laughs)) and this poor fella lost his job and you heard him later like 3 years later talking with his wife about the impact on their family and you just thought, that man who had bought that land and cut those trees down has more or less...

Gerry:	Ruined his life.

I:	Ruined yes the vast shipwreck of my life's esteems has happened.

Gerry:	[talk over] he would feel like this.

I:	Yes it was terrible.

Frank:	One person and one action can ruin your life, it's actually happened to me.  A long time ago, I am not going to go there but...

I:	Yes, but probably a lot of people have had some experience like that.

Frank:	Yes, of course yes.

I:	Not probably the same but something where something has happened, and you can put it to a person or a place, or a time or a thing. 

Gerry:	Yes, and that poor guy with the erm... the land if he hadn't reported the guy, you know...

I:	Yes he was really, he was doing his job.

Frank:	Yes, and it's your conscience too...

I:	Yes and his conscience and that's what he said, he said they had a psychologist on who said, I always advise people don't, don't be the whistle blower because you always suffer and then they say I am suffering in my conscience if I don't do it. Poor, poor guy.

Liz:	But if it's your job.

I:	Yes. It's your job to do that. To protect those trees yes.

Liz:	It's like for example if you have got you know a policeman saying something, you are saying something wrong it's the same situation and you get a warden with protecting something else it's the same situation ((laughs)).

I:	Yes, so going to go back to John Clare anybody could end up like this.

Anne:	I think, I think the... in the last stanza and verse erm... the erm... in sleep, I in childhood sweetly sleep because where I work at the school you know, they... it's, I can fully appreciate that how they just live for now, they are just unknowing about you know sort of they trust their mum and dad are going to be there and... and all the things which we think as children and grow up believing it's not true at all and you know... 

?	[19.05 - talk over]

Anne:	and it isn't because there are children who have very difficult childhoods, or lose parents or you know and... and erm... 

I:	Stay with the poem a minute, we will address that question then what does the poem think of it, so I long for scenes where man has never trod, a place where woman never smiled or wept, so man and woman they are the grown up version of being a human aren't they?

Frank:	[19.36]

I:	There to abide with my creator, God and sleep as I in childhood sweetly slept, untroubling and untroubled.  Erm... 

Sue:	He is talking about...

I:	Did you sleep well as a child?

Gerry:	Yes

I:	Pretty much.

Gerry:	You don't remember being... 

Frank:	Basically you slept like... first of all you slept like a baby.  

((laughs))

Gerry:	 That's very true.

Liz:	As well, well... I was going to say unless you have... some kids are really cruel to other kids and erm... certain kids.

I:	Yes so they might be troubled about getting off to sleep and... even though still erm... my daughter and now my grandson both had terrible trouble getting off to sleep of a night and erm... and yet once he has gone to sleep erm... you could pick him up as I did and carry him up three flights of stairs, nothing... you know that we never get that I don't think as adults not without drink or drugs.

Liz:	I mean also I think there is a certain you know when you are an adult you have got a lot more responsibility which is innate in some way because as a child the natural responsibility is with your parents, erm... and I think in some ways that is a bit you know, automatic for the fact you are a bit more aware of your surroundings [21.01]

I:	So where you get that in the poem untroubling and untroubled, it's as if those uns they can be there because there are parents and they are troubled, they are sitting down stairs saying oh I wonder if she is alright, oh yes she will be asleep now, you don't have to do that for yourself as the child.

Anne:	But then it throws to again how he himself is feeling when it used the words untroubling because obviously in writing this he thinks he is being a trouble, and he is sort of saying in childhood you know sort of I wasn't causing this difficulty or whatever, and erm... so, and...

I:	 [talk over] that's a sad part.  

Anne:	none of us have looked on the word creator God

I:	Ok well...

Anne:	None of us have done that. 

Sue:	So this place doesn't exist now, where is there that man hasn't trod.  I sometimes go looking especially if I have had a hard day at work I get off the bus on the other side, there is a beautiful tree up on that top path, a lime tree and I have lain there looking up at that tree and breathing and it's made me feel great, but people have been there before me, there is nowhere like that now is there?

I:	Maybe there wasn't possibly even, maybe it is always an ideal it's like you are longing... that's the word I long not I am going to go and seek out, or... I know where there is such a place, or...

Frank:	And maybe everybody has their happy voice and that's what he is trying to impart to you.

I:	Yes that that, at some... it does feel very different in this, in the last verse.

Frank:	It does.

Gerry:	See I think he is talking about some sort of paradise there, some beautiful place.

Liz:	[talk together] Yes that's what I...

I:	I long for scenes he says as well like as if, there might almost be...go on

Lynsey:	I was just going to say he just wants to get off the world doesn't he, he wants to stop the world and get off for a bit. 

I:	Yes

Anne:	I find that part terribly disturbing. 

[talk together]

I:	Do you think it is as well.

Lynsey:	Completely 

I:	Do you?  Why, why?	Why, do you think it's like wanting to go out like... 

Lynsey:	I can't talk about it.  

I:	Sorry, oh my God, oh dear.

Frank:	I think maybe it's more of a cry for help.

I:	At the end?

Frank:	At the end yes. 

Liz:	But I was going to say... but I was going to... 

I:	Oh  Lynsey I am really sorry, I have done this before in reading groups and made people cry I am terribly sorry.  Is it the... shall we change the poem?

((laughs))

	Shall we change the poem? Or is it the thought of the poor fellow?

Lynsey:	this is all being recorded.

I:	Oh dear, yes.

Sue:	I felt like crying before we started to talk about it.

I:	Just from the poem?

Sue:	Just from yes, just that last I don't know what it did, it did something in me I created some sort of picture, maybe somewhere I would like to be.  

Gerry:	Sometimes reading things do mean different things to you at different times in your life.

Liz:	Also depending on what you...

I:	How you live.

Liz:	What you have done, you know what has happened to you as well because if you read something and it is relating also to something which you, you can relate to then it will have a stronger impact. 

Anne:	Is it possible to... I don't... I will ask you because I don't know, is it possible to ask erm... is it Lynsey is it possible to ask is it because she wishes it was so, or because it is so that she is responding... is that possible to ask?  

I:	I am looking at her trying to...

?	Trying to understand the question.

I:	Shall I answer that Lynsey?

Lynsey:	I can tell you, I can tell you erm... I have been there.  

I:	I am really very sorry I don't honestly think you are the only person in the room.

Frank:	I have got to be honest I have been there too, but I stopped crying with all due respect Lynsey I stopped crying about it a long time ago it was just... yes.

Lynsey:	Things are quite close to the surface.

Frank:	Difficult.  

I:	I am going to tell you a story about the poem now just to try and change the atmosphere a bit so when I used to teach at the university... you just keep crying Lynsey. We’ll make you a cup of tea.

[talk together]

I:	When I used to teach at the university we had this course, evening class called Literature and Time Travel and the idea was we would dot about all over history and pick things out and read them from any time, and see what it was like to be in the 14th century or whatever it was, it was great, really enjoyed it.  Came Christmas everybody in the group said can we have a Christmas party, so I said oh right... I am here to teach, no parties, no parties, and they said oh we will all bring a poem that we like and we will bring the party as well so, I said oh well ... this woman brought this poem along and people were reading out these things they had chosen, they were like I love this one, I love this one and then she read this and everybody said oh that's a sad one isn't it.

((laughs))

	 And then she said, if I describe her as a sort of 50 year old woman in very immaculately dressed looking like a headmistress, she then said yes I used to be a street alcoholic...

Gerry:	oh... golly... wow that's dramatic.

I:	I lost my family, my kids, my husband, my farm, erm... and I was a street alcoholic in Melbourne for about 15 years and I suddenly tried to imagine this person who totally together person, obviously a professional person and she said in all that time I was kicking around the streets, I had this poem...

Gerry:	wow

I:	I had this poem and occasionally I would get it out and read it and just think yes, I am... 

Gerry:	Ah, ok

I:	Just that.  And when you think of that vast shipwreck there she was obviously she was in it, she was still going through her shipwreck.

Liz:	Because I... things that I... when we read it, I... I mean it was... I found it was sad up till the very end and I thought there is hope at the end of the tunnel.

Sue:	Yes I did.

Liz:	And just like, you know and it's like concentrating on that hope, 

Gerry:	   Yes, yes.

Liz:	that is how I... and there is a certain yes it's sad up you know, and it's suddenly... there is hope, yes which you can...

I:	[talk over] you can imagine that piece.

Liz:	Maybe [27.40]

I:	See I didn't know, before that person read me this poem I thought that the end was, sorry everybody this has gone horribly serious, but that it was like a suicide wish that end, but when she read it she said what you said, she said to me that is... he is not saying I want to be buried he is saying erm... the grass below, not on top of me...

Lynsey:	Yes

?	Oh right.

Lynsey:	If he can find a way to just take some, if he can possible find a way to take some time out of... not out of living but out of consciousness just for a bit then he might be able to get some hope...

I:	Peace or rest or because it does feel as if he is not getting much sleep.

Lynsey:	Exactly

I:	And probably with a small baby that's also true for you.

Lynsey:	Oh I know, I know, no, no that is definitely part of it.  

I:	But that is what he longs for isn't it, isn't it sleep as I in childhood sweetly slept.

Liz:	I was going to say if you have a lack of sleep it will affect how you respond to people and for stuff around you because you won't be able to function. You need sleep like you know... 

I:	Yes it's healing.

Gerry:	See I find that last paragraph very restful and peaceful and you know quite hopeful you know, you can just lie on this beautiful grass and the sky will be above you.

Sue:	Well I found it interesting that you thought of a church, because ...

Gerry:	[talk over] yes it's a vault

Sue:	[talk over] I  [29.06] that with nature now, and my dad, I used to live at the end of that road up there, and my dad always used to say when he drove up and down it it was like a natural cathedral when you look at those trees the way they arch overhead and it is, if you walk... the middle is wide enough to walk  and I have sometimes done it and it is, and it gets beautiful. Even though you have got traffic...

[talk together]

?	It's beautiful.

Liz:	I was going to say there could be religious aspect to it in the sense of that type of hope as well,  you know, because it could be an illness or something and he is you know... you know looking further from what we know here ((laughs)) you know.

I:	So why do you think he mentions God and it's an odd way of bringing...

Anne:	He is not questioning him is he, he is not questioning for all these things that are happening, my creator God he is not saying, is there a God, he is sort of saying there to abide with my creator God a statement, he is not questioning, despite all that is happening he is not questioning like we question.

Lynsey:	Well it is the times it was written as well exactly, I mean it would look quite odd for a contemporary poet to talk about my creator God you would start thinking oh he is a bit religious isn't he, but that was just completely part of the culture then you know, Christianity was unquestioned wasn't it?

Anne:	Yes but people did suffer, they did suffer, and question... I mean they would still question personally whether they would write it in a poem but they still, I mean look at all the... the [30.44]

I:	[talk over] just as an experiment it would be good to imagine say it was contemporary I mean I accept your point that Christianity was a stronger social force in 1793 and onwards but say it was here with us or if we were out of time and we didn't know any social... it does feel funny that he is so absolute about that there is a creator and yet he is in a mess.

Gerry:	Hmm

I:	And you wonder does he think, that is just almost like what I am. So this is how I was made.  Or, or is... is what God has created I don't know has it gone wrong, erm... when he is going back to childhood is that... like going back to your original self, but it's probably time to read it again if you can stand it, and if you can't stand it...

((laughs))

	If you can't stand it, we will chuck it away and... shall we, shall we just choose something else have a break for a while?  

Lynsey:	If you don't mind yes.

I:	I think that would be a kindness wouldn't it.   I am sorry to say that but I just don't think she can keep, she can't keep taking it, it's too much, it's too much, let's change the record and I will pick something else.  Erm... oh they all seem completely relevant to this now ((laughs)).  

Lynsey:	I was flicking through it thinking oh it's quite heavy duty this isn't it.

I:	It is yes. 

Liz:	Longing but anxious...

I:	But there will be something in A Little, Aloud that we can read that won't be like that, I will find one of them and later on in the weeks, when we have got used to each other a bit more, we can come back to this thought if we want to and if Lynsey was willing to, erm... let us.  How about The Little Dancers on page 36 of this one. 

	So this book A Little, Aloud, my colleague Angie Macmillan made this and she had been reading in a care home for many, many years and I kept saying to her, all the things that have worked brilliantly in that care home should put them into a book and then everybody who doesn't know loads of literature would have something to read when they were visiting their friends and relations.  So that's what she made, and that's why they have this erm... as you can see reading notes, she has made these little stories about what people thought at various times, but we will just read the Little Dancers. 

	The Little Dancers.  Lonely, save for a few faint stars, the sky dreams and lonely  below the little street into its gloom retires, secluded and shy.  Scarcely the dumb roar enters this soft retreat and all is dark.  Save where come flooding rays from a tavern window. There, to the brisk measure of an organ that down in an alley merrily plays, two children all alone and no one by, hold their tattered frocks, through an airy maze of motion lightly threaded with nimble feet dance sedately.  Face to face they gaze their eyes shining, grave with a perfect pleasure.

	I didn't read that very well at the beginning I am going to do it again.  

	Lonely, save for a few faint stars, the sky dreams.  And lonely below, the little street into its gloom retires secluded and shy.  Scarcely the dumb roar enters this soft retreat and all is dark save where come flooding rays from a tavern window.  There, to the brisk measure of an organ that down in an alley merrily plays, two children all alone and no one by, holding their tattered frocks through an airy maze of motion, lightly threaded with nimble feet, dance sedately.  Face to face they gaze, their eyes shining, grave with a perfect pleasure.

Liz:	I like that.  

?	Think it's gorgeous

I:	Lovely little moment in time, two little girls.

Gerry:	You can actually picture it...

I:	You see it all don't you, the light coming out and probably inside their mum is getting bladdered.

((laughs))

Frank:	Yes. Getting quietly stewed in there.

Liz:	Obviously it says holding their tattered frocks, they are obviously not that well off for whatever reason you don't know exactly, but they are dancing and their eyes shining.

I:	It's the way they are looking at each other that I love, it's like they are gazing into each other's...

Frank:	Time for each other basically, the rest of the world can go by. 

Gerry:	I could imagine it to be in a back street in Paris, very atmospheric... 100 years ago.  

Lynsey:	Oh really. Makes me think of downtown Birkenhead ((laughs)).  

I:	I thinking of [36.29]

Gerry:	There is obviously a lot goes on in Birkenhead that we don't know about ((laughs)).  

I:	I don't know why I thought it was Ireland.  

Gerry:	Oh right, you see we all have different ideas.  

I:	Sorry go on...

Anne:	I feel as if it we are sort of being very, very lucky to see that happening it's you know all... we are almost seeing something which we weren't expecting to see and we are very lucky to see that.

I:	To just have that little glimpse of it.

Anne:	Yes it's a moment.   

I:	The poem sort of sets that up doesn't it with, the opening, lonely, save for a few faint stars the sky dreams. I mean  don't know, you don't think of describing the sky as lonely.  And how big is that sky and if you think of it as compared to the vaulted sky in the other poem,  and what is it dark... is it just a few...

Anne:	I feel it's dark and black, 

Lynsey:	[talk together] it's like it's saying...

Anne:	I think it was autumn or winter.

Frank:	But it always feels winter, winter nights come to me. 

Lynsey:	Yes, exactly yes. It's also like saying the sky and the street aren't connected to each other.  

I:	Yes they feel, yes way, way apart and yet that is what the poet sees first of all is...

Gerry:	The darkness...

I:	That little... yes the few faint stars.

Anne:	Yes but is it early, is it early evening because you have got a few faint stars so you know...

Lynsey:	Teatime

Anne:	It could be.

I:	Yes, yes. Maybe...

Anne:	And yet I feel it's dark because you have got I feel the secluded and shy curtains drawn.  But...

I:	Yes and the street is lonely, lonely and lonely below, the little street into its gloom retires.  Secluded and shy. 

Gerry:	And there is just the light coming from the tavern window you can imagine these children being in that light like a spot light really and everything is dark around them, it's very atmospheric it's a great poem.  

Sue:	With you saying Ireland it has reminded me a friend of mine is married to an Irishman and sometimes when we are walking she will say isn't this a beautiful day the air is soft.  When you haven't got, you know it's like I get the impression it's not windy ((laughs)) or if it is outside this little area, there is a stillness isn't there.  

I:	Yes there is.

Sue:	I think that's probably [38.49] soft retreat. And of course the word soft is in there.  

I:	Ok would somebody else like to read it, would somebody else have a go at reading. Frank are you willing?

Frank:	Certainly.  Lonely, save... save for a few faint stars. The sky dreams and lonely below, the little street into its gloom retires secluded and shy.  Scarcely the dumb roar enters the soft retreat and all is dark.  Save where come flooding rays from a tavern window.  There to the brisk measure of an organ that down in an alley merrily plays, two children all alone and no one by, holding their tattered frocks, through an airy maze of motion lightly threaded with nimble feet, dance sedately face to face they gaze, their eyes shining grave with the perfect pleasure.

I:	Thank you very much.

Frank:	You are welcome. 

Anne:	It's so different because you have got the brisk measure merrily plays the organ which is sort of you can imagine quite a riotous sort of erm... jolly sound and then you have got the airy maze and erm... dance sedately and as you said their faces gaze it's... it's a different, although they are dancing to the same music it's a different type of dancing to what...

I:	What you would imagine from that organ.

Anne:	Yes

I:	Yes because have you ever seen those, like from the time of Queen Elizabeth I kind of dances where they just hold their [40.21] and go quite a few... I won't do it for the camera, a few steps backwards and forwards. ((laughs)) But that's what you think of as sedate dancing a very, very formal and it would have a different kind of music, whereas it's exactly as you say, Sue...

Anne:	Anne. ((laughs))

I:	Of course you are, I know you.  Ok Anne, Geri, Lynsey, Liz ((long pause)) Mike.

Mike:	Yes

I:	Hey... Frank.  Got you, hurray good. It would be sort of raucous and tuneful, yes very strange.  

Lynsey:	I think it has gone into screensaver mode hasn't it?  

Gerry:	It sounds a bit like Eastenders there doesn't it... ((laughs)).

I:	Very, very odd isn't it.  And yet, and that's also as you so rightly say Anne it's like that airy maze of motion threaded with nimble feet is almost as if he is seeing in slow mode, like traces of their movements and you see this lovely kind of lace of where they have been.

Anne:	And it just, it's I suppose it reflects a different type of world children live in and experience to what their parents are experiencing ...

Lynsey:	In the pub ((laughs)) 

Gerry:	In the tavern maybe.

Frank:	I don't know apart from the tattered frock that could be me because that was always my job on a Friday night, go and get your dad's wages before he drinks it all and I sat outside the pub waiting for him.  

Lynsey:	right, yes.

Gerry:	Did you?

Frank:	Yes I had to take his wage packet off him, there is so much for you, there is so much for the house but as sure as hell on a Friday night, at midnight he would come home and he wouldn't have a penny to his name.

I:	What did your dad do?

Frank:	He was a long distance lorry driver.  But lost his wife, lost my mother at 38, and basically turned to drink, and that was his thing you know.  I lived with an aunt and she always used to say, go and stand outside the Star, see if he is coming, take his wages off him. I would say [42.37]

I:	And did he happily hand his wages over?

Frank:	Hmm... put it this way I got a few thick ears.  

Gerry:	Do you remember the pub that you used to wait outside Frank?

Frank:	I do yes. It was a pub called the Little Woodman in Toxteth.  

Gerry:	Wow, does it still exist?

Frank:	No

Gerry:	I love going back to old places of my childhood to see if they are still there.

Lynsey:	What street was it on?

Frank:	It was on hill street by the Royal Southern hospital in Toxteth down by the  south docks. Down by the south docks ship.  But every Friday night without fail we lived in a block of tenements get down there, he is getting off the bus now, she would watch him out of the window my aunt, get down there... 

Gerry:	That's great.

Frank:	he is getting off the bus, take his wages off him, give him so much to stay out.  Even for a drink,  name your price, mind you those days, 40 years ago you could get drunk off a pint, or a pound but... I used to come home with his wages otherwise and that would be him then until midnight and he would be quite happy and still come home and want his tea. 

Lynsey:	Oh it's funny you say 40 years ago you are are talking about the 70s aren't you but... but, but, but you know it's the sort of thing that like my or our grandparents would have talked about as well, in the 30s and 40s.  

I:	Yes, yes

Lynsey:	And yet you know people think that sort of all that's really consigned to the past, because I think of, when I read this I think of Catherine Cookson novels.

Frank:	[talk over] what I am actually...

Lynsey:	  Catherine Cookson was always...

Frank:	[talk over] Funnily enough what I am actually thinking of reading this is Her Daddy by [43.58] K Williams...
 
Lynsey:	Oh yes, yes, yes, yes.

Frank:	Something along those lines.

Anne:	And you feel as if, I will have to go in a second but you feel he is in a... they are in a city because you have got the dumb roar so it isn't a village or something like that, it is a city environment.

I:	and it's a little kind of quiet back street, it's in the centre I agree it is, but it's... it's far off isn't it.

Anne:	But notice they call it the tavern window that sets it to an earlier time.

Frank:	Sets it then.  

Anne:	Had I better fill out this form. 

I:	Yes don't leave me with your watch as well.  

Anne:	You will all be here at 1 o'clock. Can I borrow this pen?

Gerry:	It belongs here so help yourself Anne, yes.   

I:	Would somebody else like to read it, would anybody else read it?

Sue:	I will.  Put my glasses back on. 

	Lonely, save for a few faint stars, the sky dreams, and lonely below the little street into its gloom retires secluded and shy.  Scarcely the dumb roar enters this soft retreat and all is dark.  Save where come flooding rays from a tavern window.  There to the brisk measure of an organ that down an alley merrily plays, two children all alone and no one by.  Holding their tattered frocks through an airy maze of motion lightly threaded with nimble feet dance sedately.  Face to face they gaze their eyes shining grave with the perfect pleasure.  

I:	Lovely thank you.

Sue:	Grave, that word grave.  You know when you are a kid I used to get it in reading when I was a kid, but you know when a kid is lost in play nothing else exists for them does it.  

I:	Yes they are completely in it aren't they. I am wondering about why Laurence Binyon was sort of walking down these streets and whether he was... trying to get away from the noise of life in some ways. He calls it a soft retreat doesn't he, he says lonely... into the gloom retires, secluded and shy scarcely the dumb roar enters this soft retreat and if you think of that moment where you are in a busy very, very busy place, erm... on Church Street, 3 o'clock on a Saturday afternoon, and you turn off say towards the Blue Coat or something like that and suddenly there is a very different feeling...

Frank:	 A little bit of calm

I:	Yes, yes but he is choosing this isn't he, and choosing the word retreat as well, but I don't think he expected ...

Gerry:	No I could imagine him...

I:	Just finding beauty...

Gerry:	Being up high and just glancing out of a window, erm... and seeing this happening down below.

I:	yes it's like as if from a distance.

Gerry:	He is just oh look you know there is those two little girls dancing in the lights yes. So he is not part of the scene he is just observing.

I:	Yes very, very observing.  But it feels good doesn't it, it feels good to have that little...

Anne:	Excuse I have got to go. 

I:	Right ok, see you next week.  Thank you very, very much for coming. 

Anne:	Thank you.  

Liz:	I was going to say children don't make entertainment like that for themselves nowadays.

I:	Do you not think so?

Liz:	No. 

I:	Why.  

Liz:	they are too pretty glued on their whatever backlit devices they have got.

Sue:	Well they wouldn't be out on the streets alone would they?

Frank:	And the thing is they can go in the pub with their mum and dad now can't they? 

((Laughs))

Gerry:	And cause havoc if they wouldn’t.  

Lynsey:	Depends on where you go though.  Sorry, not everybody...

Gerry:	That's true.

Sue:	Have an image of Woolton like you were talking about with the pubs but in the 60s, me and my brother used to knock on the door of the pub, my mum was in the dance team in this pub, it is still there Gardner's Arms, and could we have a packet of crisps and a bottle of pop, 

I:	Yes

Sue:	and the door closed because children weren't allowed in pubs then, the door would close and it would open again... and they would give you... and we would be sat on the wall outside.  

Lynsey:	Even on cold nights?

Sue:	Pardon?

Lynsey:	Even on cold nights?  

Sue:	I don't remember erm... the memory plays tricks on you I guess not on cold nights. 

I:	Probably not

Sue:	there you go.

I:	Yes I have got many memories of sitting outside pubs as a kid on walls or one of the ones my Nan used to drink in, would have like a little sort of vestibule I suppose and there was a hatch... 

?	Good lord...

I:	and then you looked into the bar but that was where they used to do off sales, right.

Frank:	Yes that's right.

I:	So I used to wait in the little vestibule and every now and then they would lift the hatch up and... ((laughs)) pass me a packet of crisps or something. Yes, funny days.  Now kids don't know they are born.

Frank:	They should be banned really, its [49.09] a pint, but there you go.

I:	But would you say, that's a serious question whether children today could have that moment and if they don't, are they missing something or do they, you are the youngest here so you think they don't?

Liz:	I just, every... there seems to be even within 10 years, there seems to be a massive increase in being glued on whatever device and [49.32] different ones... you know I was going to say in my day there was just the computer ((laughs)) and now there is a million other things.

I:	You have a small child how old is your baby?

Lynsey:	He is nearly 2, 2 next month yes, yes, yes.

I:	do you ever see anything like that moment?

Lynsey:	Yes I do actually, but I feel like, I feel like we are lucky and I feel like Liverpool is very different to everywhere else I have ever lived and I have lived in a fair number of places, I lived in London for a long time, I am from Birmingham but I think Liverpool is a place where sort of, you know for want of a better phrase a lot of sort of kinship structure stay intact. You know the alley ways have been sort of bolted off now so kids do play in the back alleys and my son plays with the little girls up the road and they wheel each other up and down in a little...

Gerry:	Isn't that wonderful

Liz:	[talk over] I was going to say [50.24]

Lynsey:	Massive difference because you can't go out into the street to play because of the flaming cars.

Liz:	I was going to say it's very different over on the Wirral because we don't get...

Lynsey:	The Wirral is really cary isn't it as well, 

Liz:	Yes and a bit more money to buy all the devices ((laughs)).

Lynsey:	Yes, no, no I think you are right actually. I mean, I mean erm... but erm... what was I going to say yes, yes I think it does depend on sort of the affluence of an area as well I mean erm... 

I:	Where you live is it like when you say the alleys are bolted off is it like erm... those steel gates.

Lynsey:	Black gates thingies.

I:	So once you are inside those kids can play out...

Lynsey:	Oh they have got free rein there, 

I:	Brilliant I didn't realise.

Gerry:	It's  a safe space isn't it?

Lynsey:	It is, but it's still not as open as it would have been.

I:	As it used to be in the road. Yes. 

Lynsey:	And so you are still, you are still being more cautious than you would have been in the equivalent time say 40 years ago but also, I think it does depend on, on the... the area and sort of the perception of the street as well I think it's perceived that our street is a safe street because it... because it hasn't got any through traffic and we are right at the back of the Tescos and so there is no more streets on the other side and the Tesco so it's just perceived by parents I think to be a really safe area so you can give them you know a sort of facsimile of your own freedom.  Because I remember, I remember when I was sort of 3 or 4, you know so we are talking the very, very late 70s, beginning of the 80s I remember having an unbelievable amount of free rein out on the streets and we used to play in the subway, we lived by a subway and we used to play in the subway.

Frank:	I used to play in the factory believe it not, I would go in the yard of the factory and play, 

Lynsey:	Abandoned buildings, yes, yes

Frank:	or climb over school walls and play football.  

Lynsey:	I do see kids doing that...

I:	Do you remember that freedom in your childhood?

Mike:	Yes because my grandma used to live in erm... a house raised by a load of woodlands at the back so erm... it was just basically you know,

Lynsey:	Going into the woodland...

Mike:	 and there was always a legend about  a horse and carriage falling down you know like erm... erm... the bogs going down, all going down together that was always kind of like in the back of your mind when you were going searching round and stuff you know. 

I:	Not up at Childwall Valley Road is it that way?

Mike:	No actually it's a place called Gaffas (?) outside beside Wigan.  Erm... I had a lot, and down here basically erm... well you know less, less really because you know you are enclosed aren't you. 

I:	But do you think children need or do all of us need I don't know that moment?

Lynsey:	Oh yes,

I:	Read it, someone else, come on read it again.  [53.19] read this one?

Liz:	Yes. Lonely, safe for a few faint stars, the sky dreams and lonely below. The little street into its gloom retires, secluded and shy. Scarcely the dumb roar enters this soft retreat and all is dark, save where come flooding rays from a tavern window. There, to the brisk, measure of an organ, down in an alley merr... er... merrily plays two children all alone, and no one by, holding their tattered frocks through an airy maze of motion lightly to... lightly threaded with nimble feet, dance sedately face to face, they gaze, their eyes shining grave with a perfect pleasure.

I:	Lovely thank you very much.

?	I am due...

I:	You have to go ok sorry, ok so we will bring it to a close I think but erm... they are very alone, they are very private in that little place. 

Mike:	Quite ethereal isn't it?

I:	Yes and it just feels as if they have... we could blink and they almost could be ghosts or could be gone couldn't they.

Sue:	Could almost be like a memory. 

I:	Yes maybe a memory.  Tavern is a very old word isn't it?

Gerry:	Yes

I:	I love that one. Goes really well with the little story that goes before it, so maybe another week we could read this story.  

Liz:	A  Child World.

I:	Yes, yes, yes.  It's a good one, it's a good one yes.  Yes.  Well thanks very much everybody, that was nice.

Lynsey:	Sorry I forced the direction of the session a bit erm... I just, John Clare just in general just really does me in but that one yes.

I:	Sorry, really sorry.

Lynsey:	No, no it's alright ((laughs)) I wasn't expecting. 

I:	And you did right to go out and I was really glad you came back in I thought after a while oh I see she is not going to blow her nose, she is upset.  I was wondering whether to ask you to take over and then I would come after you but then I thought oh she will just come back and you did.

Lynsey:	Yes,

I:	Thank you, thank you very much.  I think next week I will try and arrange a better table that one is a bit of an odd shape for us.  Lovely, thank you very much.  

Sue:	Thanks Jane, I have got to transport two, did you see those little pottery wellington boots with pansies in them, I was trying to get two of those to Birkenhead ((laughs)) and one of my cats has already dug one of them out.  Honestly.

I:	Who are you going to see in Birkenhead.

Sue:	My son lives in Birkenhead.  And it's the grandchildren's birthday party tomorrow. Joint birthday party, I will be destroyed on Monday.

I:	Good ok well you enjoy your grandchildren though.  

Sue:	Shall I take these...

I:	I will put them on this tray yes great.  

Sue:	Thank you very much. 

I:	Thank you.

Mike:	[57.38]

Liz:	Is the taxi going to pick me up?

I:	Yes I think so erm... I don't know, did somebody arrange the taxi this morning?

Liz:	Apparently it's been booked

I:	Ok so I don't know if I should contact maybe Anna or and try and see where they will come.

Liz:	[58.08] I can't remember where he dropped me off, and [58.12] the taxi picked me up last week either so...

I:	Did he pick you up in the car park?

Liz:	Yes, 

I:	I will walk you round, that's the best thing.

Liz:	Because like, because like 2 weeks both taxis I have not known where this is. 

I:	Yes they won't know yes.  Would it be a good idea if we just gave you a map, you could give the taxi?

Liz:	I will bring an A to Z next time.  

I:	See Wirral taxis don't know about Liverpool. Even some Liverpool taxis don't know how to get here. 

[58.49 - talk together]

Liz:	But it's a bad start to the day when you...

I:	Yes when you feel it's all going.

Liz:	Because I have already had to get into Birkenhead on the bus to get to the Lauries centre to find Terry not turning up and then the taxi driver not... you know the sat nav is taking me here, it's like well this isn't it I know that.  

I:	Ok.

[talking in the background can't hear ]

Lynsey:	I read a lot of [59.36]

I:	[59.43]

[talk together]

I:	I just want to say are you alright?

Lynsey:	Oh don't worry about it ((laughs)).   John Clare just does my head in honestly in a good way.

I:	Well I thought you were very brave to come back so thank you.

Lynsey:	Oh no, no, no I couldn't, I didn't want to just, just wander off you know... thank you.  

Erin:	Do you need this information sheet or?

Lynsey:	Oh no, no I had it last week, yes, yes.  








