David Swan, Nathaniel Hawthorne

[05.40]
NN: We can be but partially acquainted even with the events which actually influence our course through life, and our final destiny. There are innumerable other events, if such they may be called, which come close upon us, yet pass away without actual results, or even betraying their near approach, by the reflection of any light or shadow across our minds.
[read twice]

NN: Ok fair enough so on the way here I might have banged into somebody on the Calderstones roundabout, and got into a major fight and ended up in prison, but I missed them by three inches and so that bit of my destiny was so close!

Sue:	I’ve heard that referred to as circles. You know say you’re following one particular circle and 
	somebody else is, and they might cross at points but they might not.

NN: Yes, they might, and how different it would be if they did. And the odd thing seems to be coming out of here is how we don’t even know that that might have happened. So ‘without even betraying their near approach by the reflection of any light or shadow across our minds’.

Anne:	And I like the way it uses the words ‘acquainted’ – ‘even with the events which actually 
	influence our course through life’, because those are so full of impact and yet here we’re 
	only ‘partially acquainted’. So the things that might happen that we do change we may not 
	even know maybe quite the significance or why till maybe later.

Liz: 	I mean when you were reading I was thinking that it was actual events, not necessarily like 
	for example you missed someone and you could have hit someone but they’re less impact 
	on your life than say a massive – cause you’ve got life-changing experiences and you’ve got 
	experiences which don’t really have as much impact. You know that’s how I read it more. 

NN: Yes, and those life-changing ones again may be things that have happened, or there may be some of them that nearly happened, or didn’t happen.

Anne:	What is worrying is ‘or even betraying their near approach’ – that is. You know how we, you 
	know we like to feel secure and we go out and we’re all, we’ve got things around us that 
	we’re safe in, and yet there you know you just don’t know what could happen, things that 
	can happen so suddenly.

NN: Yes as if they are – that word ‘betraying’ – as if they are almost going to hijack you, or jump out from behind a bush in the park or something.

Anne:	And it’s almost the shock, the shock of it. 

NN: Could we all know the vicissitudes of our fortunes, life would be too full of hope, and fear, exaltation or disappointment, to afford us a single hour of true serenity. This idea may be illustrated by a page from the secret history of David Swan.

Secret I suppose because he hasn’t told anybody, and some of it he doesn’t even know himself.

Anne:	And I think it’s true I mean we all sort of say you know I wish I knew what was going to 
	happen. But can you imagine if we did, we’d probably want to give up on life because it 
	would be like watching a television programme 

Liz:	Again or something, yes!

Anne:	You’d be bored! I mean we all want to know that things are going to be alright, but we also 
	would be terribly bored if we knew.

NN: Or scared, if we knew!

Liz:	Also it’s assuming that you’ve got no control over what’s going to happen and you may 
	change your decision you know which would change the course of paths type of thing. And 
	sometimes it can be quite handy to know the likelihood of something happening if you 
	choose a path, to actually make the relevant decision to minimise that, if that

NN: It would be interesting to know what you think the ratio is of things we choose that shape our lives, and things that are random accidents. I mean, what do you think Sue:.

Sue:	Yes, I mean

Fifty-fifty, or

Sue:	Ooh I don’t know.

Mike:	People talk about regrets don’t they, have you had any regrets, looking back. People are 
	usually happy with their lives and some say you know I’ve got no regrets.

NN: Mmm but. Sorry.

Anne:	I think I believe in predestination even down to the slightest thing. I mean I also believe I 
	have complete control so they’re two conflicts. But even sort of you may not put the radio 
	on at that time usually and you do, and it’s a piece that means something, that tells you 
	something from some past memory or some person. And you would have not have put it on 
	and there it is. And it seems to be, you know you have to try and think everything will work 
	out in the end. But sometimes when things work out in the end it might not be your end 
	they work out in...

[up to 12.00]

[around 14.00 talking about Lynsey getting upset the previous week]

Liz:	Often you can actually read something and you can relate to that person or something like 
	that. I mean I’m reading a book at home, and it’s got like a drastic turn of events and she’s 
	really like no, I have to stay strong I have to do X, Y, Z and whatnot, and it sounds highly 
	unlikely but if I can remember I have to try. And they’re just really thinking I can relate to 
	that not necessarily in the same context but if I think of my own problems and you know the 
	challenges I can read it and think, change a few minor details and you’ve got me.

[17.00 continues reading. 19.00 another stop. 23.00 continues reading]

around 36.00

NN: It drives you mad though when you can’t get it, as it does for the old gentleman. You know, ‘such a sleep as that brought on without an opiate, would be worth more to me than half my income!’ Really would swap for it!

Anne:	In that is there like a fairytale sort of would I give half my kingdom

NN: Yes for a good night’s sleep!

[38.00 continues reading]

around 41.00, talking about the middle-aged widow

NN: But she’s made a huge leap from bending a twig so that the sun doesn’t fall on his face to – it sounds as if she’s going to give him an inheritance doesn’t it, from one moment to the next. 

Anne:	We have to laugh at ourselves. Because you know sort of as you said women may feel like 
	that, we do respond in that way, and you have to laugh at yourself really when you read 
	that, because she’s very curious what you yourself expected, and that that would be how 
	you might sort of think.

Liz:	Also cause it says about ‘our departed Henry’, you know I wonder whether there’s a certain 
	gap in her own life, hence the big jump, that it’s been exaggerated by that. She may have felt 
	motherly generally, of course but it was like

NN: She brought that with her to the moment, and here was an object ready for it. It came with her.

[44.00, talking about the furtive interest of the couple in this first incident of the story]

NN: What is it that is attractive about a sleeping person then...

45.00:

Anne:	There’s a certain respect for it because they’ve got something you haven’t got, and they’re 
	able to do something you can’t do, and so a respect or almost I mean I don’t know whether, 
	awe isn’t the right word I don’t think but they’ve done something which you envy.

***

The Road Not Taken, Robert Frost

[1hr 34m after second reading]

Liz:	I mean it could be a very minor choice, but it could be a very big choice, like I mean for 
	example a lot of my health problems started when I went to South Africa and had a nasty 
	encounter with an electric fence. Long story. But if I hadn’t gone, I probably would still be 
	like want to go here want to go here want to go here, you know. At the same time I wouldn’t 
	have, or I don’t think I’d have the same problems as I do now, or would my life be totally 
	different. Or would I have the same mentality as now I don’t know.

NN: That must be really hard to carry round with you that feeling of if. If. 

Liz:	Well it could have been worse.

NN: Well true. 

Liz:	It could have been. It may have been the better option. Something else could have, I could 
	have not gone and done something else, something worse could have happened. Or I could 
	be a worse person for it, which is actually in a sense is worse. 

NN: Yes, which I suppose are the sorts of thoughts you have to build up when something accidentally bad has happened to you. It must have taken you quite a while mentally to put that all together. It’s interesting I mean, I suppose yours is quite a big example, that electric fence. 

Liz:	I’m saying comparing that to say I’ll do this for the Reader Organisation on a Friday which is 
	a minor thing, cause it’s only one day a week, it’s shorter and you haven’t got the same 
	commitment as if something, you know

NN: I’m thinking of things like when people go and do exploring

Liz:	I’d say.

NN: Don’t do it!

Liz:	Don’t do it. Don’t go anywhere near, anywhere near, anywhere with electric fences. Don’t 
	do this, don’t do that, don’t do the other. I’d be awful you know, I’d be awful if, if I ever had, 
	if I ever had, if if I ever had, if I ever if I ever had children because I’d be like, you’re not 
	doing that. I mean I was gonna say, I was gonna say, but don’t do what I did.

NN: Well that’s what parents say though, they all say that. 

Sue:	I think I might have done that, my own son...






200913readingrec1


