I:	[02.50] Hello. Now I have to sit here with my back to the camera that is the latest instruction. 

Anne:	The recorders are on.

I:	they are on are they. Is this on do you know?

Anne:	I am not sure. 

I:	I think it is. Ok great. I wonder if my head might... would you mind just sitting there.

Gerry:	You will be the talking head Jane.

I:	Yes that would be, I wouldn't [03.25] to block the view.  It needs to be higher.  Oh dear, ok well good, good job I thought of that.  Come in...

Liz:	Is this the same room as last time or is it?

I:	Yes the same room.

Liz:	I thought it was at the other side of things.  

I:	Oh dear, really it could do with being really high up and then tipped maybe that would...  be the way to do it.  Erm... will somebody take responsibility about putting the kettle on or offering drinks...

?	[4.18] 

	That was good timing.

I:	Did your colleague make it to the taxi today did that all work ok?

Liz:	Oh [4.28 - talk together]

Frank:	Black coffee please.

Anne:	What would you like to drink?

Liz:	there was some herbal tea?

Anne:	There is camomile. And what would you like to drink?

I:	I will just have hot water please.

Anne:	Ok.   We have only got two mugs... 

I:	Oh right, thought I had brought them up. I must have left the tray somewhere.  Right... I will go and get the tray and...

Gerry:	We could probably do with a round table.

I:	yes, would you like to have a little... see if you do it. Need to be somebody sitting in my seat so that we can see their head and see if they are blocking it.

Frank:	I will offer that service yes.

?	[05.18] 

[talk together]

Frank:	all contributions gratefully received yes.  

Anne:	These are shortbread there is more.  So don't feel shy.  Do you take milk and do you take sugar?

Gerry:	No just milk.

Anne:	Just milk.  

Gerry:	That is ok,  [06.25] see everybody around the table.  

Frank:	that's me blocking the...

Gerry:	No, no it's not.  Can't get the people on that side in.  You know I think it's the, you know the table needs to be pushed back down there. 

Grace:	That's a good idea.

Gerry:	yes but I think the table needs to be pushed further away because erm.. you know it's not wide enough.

Grace:	That's why we positioned it front on because we couldn't get far back enough.

Anne:	It was when you were getting Jane's head entirely.  

Gerry:	but I think because of the way the screen is I don't think you will be able to get everybody in anyway, well that's just... unless you go right in that corner and you get distance, unless you can...

Liz:	It was in that corner last week wasn't it?

Anne:	It was in, was it that corner... 

Liz:	I am sure it was that corner, or was that the kettle ((laughs)).  

Frank:	Now if we could get a camera in the kettle that would be it. 

[07.45]

Gerry:	Yes I think... the other thing that you could do, is having people sitting in a semi-circle and then you get more people in and then Jane [08.12] because otherwise you have got backs of heads and that sort of thing.  

Anne:	What would you like to drink?

I:	That's fine I have got water now.

Anne:	Oh ok.  

Sue:	Black coffee, thank you. 

I:	Ok. So we have sorted out... I still think the [08.37]

Gerry:	Don't know how Steven Spielberg copes do you? ((laughs))

I:	No

Frank:	I would settle for the money.

I:	They seem to go with that other one but shall we just move it into place first and see, you stand on there to see what it's like and I will sit there with my head in the way.  

Gerry:	There is a little stool there.  

I:	Directors stool that's for you.  

Anne:	Put it there.

Sue:	Thank you that's great.  

Anne:	That's [09.30]

Frank:	Thanks

I:	I got here really early today and the sun wasn't out when I arrived.  

Sue:	I was wondering if it was going to come out.  It's just gorgeous.  

Anne:	I hope that has waited long enough for you.

?	It's not for me, that's [09.51]

Anne:	I made you a coffee...

Sue:	I will squeeze in and then I will stop fidgeting hopefully.  

I:	Right, how is my head now ((laughs))

Grace:	Can barely see it.

I:	good, I will lean back as well that should help.  Can you see the others though?

?	Erm... 

?	I am have moved your stick Anne just so as you know, you don't do that do you, you might go like that to where you thought it was.  

I:	We could start.

Liz:	I mean it was in that corner last week. It worked.

I:	Yes but they couldn't see everybody. Because we... but I think your idea of a semi-circle might work if we turn next week, try again turn the tables that way...

Gerry:	And then [11.03]

I:	Yes...

Gerry:	Then everyone is facing and you could...

Anne:	[11.04] could go... 

I:	Move round... 

[talk over]

I:	Who knew all this went into... into

[11.24]

I:	Once when I was a student I went for a soap and face cream trial, only because they paid you and erm... it was something like you got £7 every time you went, and you had to wash one half of your face with...

Gerry:	Oh no...

I:	with one soap and wash the other side with something else, and then put two different things on either side of it, under their supervision, and then they examined your skin under a microscope and it was like that but it turned out to be Dove soap, 

Gerry:	Oh...

I:	and eventually about 3 years later it was launched but when we finished the trial they gave us loads of bars of it as well.  

[talk together]

I:	and we may still need you all to move up I am afraid.

Frank:	By all means.

I:	So that Franks visible. Sorry.

Frank:	Is that a good thing ((laughs)).

[talk together]

Sue:	It's only when you sit down that you see where the spaces are you can't see them so well standing up.  

I:	So Liz we have managed to replace the bulbs with real bulbs.

Liz:	Real bulbs, proper bulbs ((laughs))

I:	So if we do need the light on and you might down your end, do you think you do? It's these if you want. Can you pass this down.  Thank you I don't know if there is a plug down that end anywhere.  Ok.  It may work. 

Anne:	Oh that was my stick.

I:	I will get it Anne.

Anne:	No don't worry as long as nobody trips over it that is the only thing. 

I:	Ok at least there is some light.

Anne:	can we put it in that corner, no, no the stick ((laughs)).

Sue:	It's turned into a comedy now.  It's Fawlty Towers. I was going to say Brian Rix but that's too old.  

((laughs))

Grace:	Can I give one quick notice.

I:	Yes

?	Fawlty Towers is a better one.

Grace:	When I give out these forms at the end, we want to add one little question which I will remind you of at the end but I just wanted to sort of tell you what it was beforehand. Erm.. so after completing the [13.45] please can you write at the bottom of the page two words or phrases that you feel reflect or represent the session you have just completed. So you don't need to think about that in advance but just so you know...

Frank:	cheers

I:	Alright thank you. See you at the end.

Grace:	Yes

Anne:	don't forget I have to go.

I:	So has everybody got a book? Today I thought we would, because we raised up some things about childhood the week before, I thought it might be erm...

?:	Oophs

I:	A good idea to read erm... this extract from Great Expectations which starts on page 39.  And is called Strange Ladies. I am just going to put this stool out in case the final person arrives, it won't be very comfy but it's better than nothing.  So, it's page 39, and erm... Strange Ladies and it sort of follows in the book, and remember we read little dancers, those two little girls down an alley way.

Sue:	Yes that was lovely

I:	Yes it was lovely wasn't it, so then, then we come onto this. So this is an extract from Great Expectations by Charles Dickens and erm... a couple  of years ago,  I don't if any of you have been to the Penny Readings that The Reader puts on, at George's Hall.

Sue:	Only the very first one.

I:	You will all be invited this year.

?	I have never been able to get a ticket.

I:	You will get them, it's a special reward for being in this study.  Yes. 

Sue:	It was fantastic.

I:	It is going to be Sunday 15 December, ages away. Anyway that's by the by but this was to say a couple of years ago, the actress and director Janet Suzman came and I don't know if you have ever seen her...

Gerry:	Yes a long time ago.

I:	she was a great actress, world class and she read this at the Penny Readings and it is already daunting me a little now because I just think

((laughs))

I:	It was one of the best things I have ever experienced just to see her just simply standing there with a book reading. Wasn't acting, she was reading. Magnificent. Anyway, so Pip is a young orphan, living with his much older sister and her husband the village blacksmith.  And in this extract he has been summoned to Satis House by Miss Havisham, a wealthy old woman who having been jilted by her fiancé on the very day of her wedding, has lived out the rest of her life as if in a state of suspended animation.  Never leaving the room in which she received her terrible news. 

	I knocked and was told from within to enter, we think Pip is about maybe 11 or 12. I entered, therefore and found myself in a pretty large room well lighted with wax candles. No glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it, it was a dressing room as I supposed with the furniture, though much of it was of forms and uses then quite unknown to me, but prominent in it, was a draped table with a gilded looking glass and I made out at first... and that I made out at first sight to be a fine lady's dressing table.  

[someone enters]

	Hello, come in there is a seat for you here. 

Lynsey:	Oh great. Do you want me to leave this open yes?

I:	You could close it now because I really left it open in case you...

Anne:	We have got this other seat, we might as well use this other seat then. 

I:	Have we.

Anne:	We have got a spare seat rather than a stool.

I:	Mike would you pass it down to me that other seat.  Thank you.  Ok.  Right.  We are just starting, I will start again we are on page 39.  It's an extract from Great Expectations. 

	So, erm... can't remember, can hardly remember last week but, we read this one about man went to sleep at the side of the road and passersby came by, it's like a fairly story and all of them nearly, nearly did something to him like fell in love with him, nearly left him their money in their will, nearly killed him but none of them actually for one reason or another managed to do anything and then he woke up and he didn't know all these things had nearly happened to him so we were talking a lot about near misses and things that don't quite happen and it was just quite strange wasn't it,

((laughs))

	The course of a life. So but because of that and because of the  Little Dancers the week before I thought we would go, carry on sort of in a child life and sort of shape of life kind of route of things, so Great Expectations.  

	So I knocked and was told from within to enter. I entered therefore and found myself in a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles.  No glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it, it was a dressing room, as I supposed from the furniture though much of it was of forms and uses then quite unknown to me.  But prominent in it was a draped table with a gilded looking glass and that I made out at first sight to be a fine lady's dressing table.   Whether I should have made out this object so soon if there had been no fine lady sitting at it, I cannot say.  In an armchair with an elbow resting on the table and her head leaning on that hand, sat the strangest lady I have ever seen, or shall ever see.  She was dressed in rich materials, satins and lace and silks, all white, her shoes were white, and she had a long white veil dependent from her hair, and she had bridal flowers in her hair but her hair was white. Some bright jewels sparkled on her neck and on her hands and some  other jewels lay sparking on the table. Dresses less splendid than the dress she wore and half packed trunks were scattered about. She had not quite finished dressing for she had but one shoe on, the other was on the table with her hand, her veil was but half arranged, her watch and chain were not put on, and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets and with her handkerchief and gloves and some flowers and pray book, all confusedly heaped about the looking glass.  It was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed.  But, I saw that everything within my view, which ought to be white, which had been white long ago and had lost its lustre, and sorry... had been white long ago and had lost its lustre and was faded and yellow. I saw that the bride within the bridal dress had withered like the dress and like the flowers and had no brightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes. I saw that the dress had been put upon the rounded figure of a young woman, and that that the figure on which it now hung loose, had shrunk to skin and bone.  Once I had been taken to see some ghastly wax work at the fair, representing I know not what impossible personage lying in state.  Once I had been taken to one of our old marsh churches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug out of  a vault under the church pavement. Now, wax work and skeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at me. I should have cried out if I could. Who is it, said the lady at the table. Pip ma'am.  Pip.  Mr Pumblechook's boy ma'am, come to play.  Come here and let me look at you, come close.  It was when I stood before her, avoiding her eyes that I took note of the surrounding objects in detail, and saw that her watch had stopped at 20 minutes to 9, and that a clock in the room had stopped at 20 minutes to 9.  Look at me, said Miss Havisham, you are not afraid of a woman who has never seen the sun since you were born.  I regret to state that I was not afraid of telling the enormous lie comprehended in the answer, no.  Do you know what I touch here she said, laying her hands one upon the other on her left side? Yes ma'am it made me think of a young man. What do I touch?  Your heart. Broken.  She uttered the word with an eager look, and with strong emphasis and with a weird smile of having had a boast in it after she kept her hands there for a little while and slowly took them away as if they were heavy. I am tired, said Miss Havisham, I want diversion, and I have done with men and women. Play.  

	((laughs))  

Sue:	That really brought that alive for me I have read that a few times, that was just brilliant.

I:	It is fantastic.  He is so powerful isn't he?

Sue:	I don't remember that description so vividly.

I:	Of the whiteness and the...

Sue:	Yes,

Anne:	I like the fact she had one of her shoes wasn't quite on as if she had been getting ready and even in that putting her shoes on, she hadn't completed it, it wasn't finished.  

I:	Yes

Lynsey:	So she has had one shoe on, for ...

I:	For 25 years.  ((laughs)). Yes it's amazing I was surprised when I was reading to see the bit that said, erm... it was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, because we don't know yet in the story but he is going to keep going back there once a week now for some years.  So he will see all this, over and over again.  Erm... so, though I saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed. And I just wondered, if you remember or, even here, I mean... we are feeling mildly comfortable in this room now, but do you remember a couple of weeks ago for the first time we came up the stairs and walked along the corridor, what it's like when you see things or meet people for the first time how much do you think you do take in, or comprehend at once? Compare that with today.  

Gerry:	When you are more familiar.

I:	Yes and you get...

Gerry:	Gives you a different feel.

I:	But do you think you still do see a lot when you come for the first time? Do you take it in?

Liz:	I think there is too much to take in.

Frank:	Too much to take in the first time, it's sort of getting used to the setting isn't it.

Liz:	Yes because it's not only where you are a meeting a bunch of strange people, no offence ((laughs)) 

Gerry:	We are all strange [25.37]

Liz:	You have... because like last time I was here I was told to go straight up and you expect me to remember ((laughs)). 

I:	Yes and if you think back to that time when we just met in the big room downstairs, do you have a picture of that... what a strange, well friendly but odd isn't it.

Anne:	But here he is remembering particularly the dressing table, and when you go, the first thing sort of I noticed was this window with the view, and... and so maybe we remember specific things and not the whole which we take in later but there is a specific focus that we focus on. Like I mean there he is focussed particularly on the dressing table for obvious reasons but, it is specific as opposed to a general.

I:	Yes that is interesting, I am trying to remember the first time I came into this building which would be about 18 months ago, erm... you think... I think I mainly remember the shutters in the big room down below, because of the, when we came in... yes that's right no I am not remembering the first time. When we came in those shutters for the benefit of the tape, this has to be confidential... but City Watch used to be in that room as an office and they kept the shutters shut all day...

Lynsey:	Ooh, just had the lights on.

I:	Yes, 

Lynsey:	God

I:	And it's a bit of a nuisance opening the shutters every morning it takes about 8 minutes, but 

Lynsey:	You are just letting the light in aren't you?

I:	The light is so fantastic you think...

Sue:	And the view of the sky and everything, you are in all day.

Liz:	Also, otherwise, say especially during the winter you know you wouldn't see any daylight at all, and that isn't healthy.

I:	No that's right.

Anne:	Well is that not what we have got here, where she has never...

I:	Exactly ((laughs)).  This is it, yes that's interesting. So I do really clearly remember that room being sort of full of desks and men in uniforms and the shutters all being shut. Quite a lot of  [27.45]

Anne:	The ceiling is sort of ornate...

I:	Yes as you come into the hallway yes, that's right and the strange thing is there is confusion because the walls aren't in the right places so you never know which way you should turn. 

Lynsey:	There are lots of walls isn't there yes.

I:	And that does disorientate you I think because your instinct as you enter is like, I should be in a hall or something.

Liz:	I was going to say I am not familiar with the grounds either but by the time I get here I am already disorientated before I even get to the building ((laughs)).

I:	Which is one of the things they have been talking about downstairs I believe and the fact that it's as if you come at the building sideways on, rather than...

Gerry:	Oh yes...  if you come that way as opposed to walking in...

I:	You probably don't because you come from the other direction.  So do you see the whole house as you approach it?

Lynsey:	Yes, yes because I am coming up along the side, I go past the palm house, not the palm house, the house...

Anne:	the Calderstones

Lynsey:	The house with the Calderstones in it, and then walk up and then turn off.  

I:	Right, because most of us... 

Lynsey:	I actually [28.45]

I:	Are coming from the car park at the back there and coming up the side alley which is an odd way to approach a grand house really.

Lynsey:	Yes, yes it is from behind...

Liz:	When I was walking here this morning I was having to actually make a special effort to remember which way I walked so I could get back to the car park. 

[29.06]

Sue:	Like Hansel and Gretel you could put the [29.09] on. 

Liz:	unfortunately I didn't have anything like that [29.15]

Anne:	I think what is surprising when you come in is, is the steps, is that they are so erm... they are so ungrand, I don't mean the stairs in the house but the steps down at the bottom, and the door is so ungrand but the building itself is so grand.  

I:	It's a very odd front door isn't it. Ok so here is a child viewing a whole load of things and then later, I mean he is writing this story now...

Liz:	How old is he?

I:	as an adult... so he is about 12 when he is having the experience, but when he is writing the story if you like of Great Expectations he is I don't know 30, so he is an adult remembering a child's experience.  Erm... 

Anne:	without reading sort of on, you know sort of when she says to him, play. Children can can't they, they can...

I:	Just play.

Lynsey:	Play to order.

Anne:	Yes

I:	((laughs)) well to order yes.  Don't know about to order, they can play in extreme circumstances that's very true, 

Lynsey:	Oh yes.

I:	but to order I don't know. 

Anne:	we will find out won't we ((laughs)).

I:	Yes.  I don't know if there is anything else you wanted to notice in that part before we go. 

Anne:	It was erm... about erm... when he said about the furniture, erm... it was on the first page and it was a dressing room I supposed from the furniture, though much of it was of forms and uses then quite unknown to me. First of all I thought when I read it I thought it was sort of so old fashioned and so... but then I realised it was his, maybe his lack of experience of a woman's dressing table.

I:	Yes, because as a boy from a blacksmith's forge, he is used to rough pieces of yes furniture knocked together out of oak planks, by his father you know.  

Sue:	It's like they have got waxed candles, he isn't used to having them.

I:	Waxed candles as opposed to tallow.  So it's like erm... what would be for us the difference of I went recently to a major law firm in the city of London, where the foyer was about as tall as this house, and so their flowers were about as tall as this room.

Sue:	Wow

I:	You know and you just think oh... this is like a life I don't know anything about.  And that is what like you said, with tallow candles. 

Gerry:	I like the use of the name Mr Pumblechook, you know he throws these funny names in from time to time. It sort of lightens the mood a little bit.

Anne:	I note he doesn't say Master, it's sort of erm... he doesn't say Master Pumblechook, he says... it's Mr 

I:	Mr Pumblechook's boy.  Mr Pumblechook is his uncle, his sort of uncle yes something like that. A friend of his sister or something anyway but he is called Mr Pumblechook in town. He is a seed merchant, a seed factor so a very middle class tradesman in the town...

Anne:	I love the old marsh churches because we went erm... it just has a picture of that area sort of, it's very evocative of what it's like in East Anglia you know the churches just arising out of the landscape. 

I:	Yes just strange flatness.  Right, so on we go.  Play then. Top of page 42.  I am tired said Miss Havisham, I want diversion and I have done with men and women.  Play.  I think it will be conceded by my most disputatious reader that she could hardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything in the wide world more difficult to be done under the circumstances.  I sometimes have sick fancies she went on and I have a sick fancy that I want to see some play.  There, there with an impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand play, play, play.  But I found myself so unequal to the performance that I stood looking at Miss Havisham in what I supposed she took for a dogged manner in as much as she said when we had taken a good look at each other, are you sullen and obstinate ((laughs)). No ma'am I am very sorry for you and very sorry I can't play just now.  If you complain of me I shall get into trouble with my sister, so I would do it if I could, but it is so new here and so strange and so fine, and... melancholy I stopped fearing I might say too much, or had already said it.  And we took another look at each other.  Before she spoke again she turned her eyes from me, looked at the dress she wore, and at the dressing table and finally at herself in the looking glass, so new to him she muttered.  So old to me, so strange to him, so familiar to me, so melancholy to both of us.   Call Estella you can do that, call Estella.  To stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house, bawling Estella to a scornful young lady neither visible nor responsive and feeling it a dreadful liberty so to roar out her names is almost as bad as playing to order but she answered at last and her light came along the dark passage like a star.

	I just want to stop for a while and have a good look at this relationship between him and Miss Havisham. She thinks he is dogged.  Erm... but I am remembering old people I knew when I was a child, or people you didn't know very well or you just met them once,  how when I say old, you know they could be that could mean 40

((laughs))

I:	but how weird they seemed. Do you know teachers, teachers seemed odd didn't they, they always...

Frank:	Especially where I went to school. ((laughs)). 

I:	Where did you go to school?

Frank:	I was educated because of my disability, special education a school called Sandfield Park in West Derby. 

I:	Oh right, yes.

Frank:	Basically it was a lot of teachers because not much was expected years ago of people with disabilities, and I liked writing, reading, making... composing short stories and one teacher I just don't know what to do with you boy...  and his actual language was, and excuse this go and sit in the so and so corner, and write me a story, no work with the rest of the class, don't [36.14] you are way too clever for this lot, that is not being big headed saying that, that was fact.  

I:	So did you sit and write stories?

Frank:	I went and sat in the corner yes I sort of dropped out of school when I was 14, 15 because it was going nowhere. Started playing truant doing my own thing and I started writing stories and still do to this day.

I:	So that's interesting that you would... you had that from that long, why do you think you liked that?

Frank:	I didn't really I thought they should be giving me some form of education.

I:	Something to do.

Frank:	Yes, because every education I had got, and every qualification I got was in adulthood,  after... got to better yourself. The expectations when you left in these... I always say I went to a special school but believe you me there was nothing special about it. That is what I say, because that is what it was termed special school.  So...

Anne:	But if it was a... is it alright to ask, if it isn't say.  If it was a special school, why then, why was it you were signalled out among everybody else in an even worst way...

Frank:	Because I had an enquiring mind shall I say I wanted to learn, in all sincerity and not much was expected of the other pupils.  

I:	so really that teacher recognised...

Frank:	Now my family are actually in education, brothers, sister, sister-in-law the rest of it and they say now you would have gone to mainstream, I begged and pleaded to go to mainstream school but they said no, it mightn't work for you so... I was guided by my elders and [37.45]

Gerry:	We were channelled quite  young because I remember being you in junior school and there was the A stream and the B stream and if you were in the B stream there were completely different expectations of what you were going to be and there was no interchange over the years.

Frank:	well there was absolutely no expectations of anybody. 

Gerry:	That was it, yes.

Frank:	I remember getting a GCSE in English in Grade 4, and it was like I had qualified for Cambridge, it was the talk of the school for months it really was.  Do you know Frank has got a GCSE English in grade 4, [38.15]. I went home and said to my sister who was a trainee teacher at the time... nothing at all you lazy little bugger, should have worked more at it and got more qualifications. 

((laughs))

I:	That's the sister being a sister for you.

Frank:	That was it. So I came out and every qualification after it was in adulthood basically because you wanted to improve but there was not sort of encouragement or grounds for self improvement.

Gerry:	And I think parents accepted what the school said in those days you know they didn't try and go and get you a tutor if they thought you were better or whatever, what they said particularly if you went to a church school well that was it, my sister had that problem yes.

I:	It's a thing in the book, I don't know if many of you have read the whole of Great Expectations but in a way this is an opportunity for Pip this is why his sister has sent him and Mr Pumblechook, it's like a very wealthy lady wants a boy to come to her house.  So that is completely different to being in the marsh forge apprenticed to Joe to learn blacksmithing, where there will be no education, or anything and yet the discomfort of it, even of entering this weird set up, I mean it's obviously we know it's weirder than most middle class people, but he doesn't know really anything yet.  

Anne:	Can I comment about her as well there. She is obviously in this situation erm... and she has not changed it for all those years, but she still, within that she still wanted diversion so erm... it's, there is even, even within that state, there is still movement in some way.

I:	That is interesting isn't it yes. Erm... she says broken, she utters the word with an eager look, like as if she wanted to see what effect that has on him, and with strong emphasis and a weird smile, that had a kind of boast in it, or...

Sue:	Martyrdom.

I:	Yes it's really erm... maybe she is getting bored now with her broken heart and she wants someone to see it. 

Sue:	It's not even a hopeful thing is it, it's not as though you know there is a spark of life returning and she wants to get back out into the world, it's not that even is it.

Lynsey:	No, it is really manipulative I mean she basically wants, she wants to kind of display it... she revels, she revels in the fact, I mean you know how could anybody sort of stay in that kind of state of sort of status for so long if they didn't get some kind of weird satisfaction out of the fact that somebody had done that to her.

Frank:	Like life on her terms is what it comes down to.

Lynsey:	Exactly.

Anne:	But surely if she was a young woman, when she was a young woman, she was getting married, surely she would have heard members of the family who would have then have arranged, even if she loved him, and what, where are they in the way she has become. Certainly in the early time you know would they...

I:	You look like you know an answer to that...

Liz:	I am just thinking, I still wouldn't have actually looked that much into it ((laughs)) not just now, I am thinking where did you get that from.

I:	well obviously we are only reading an extract here, and I mean I don't know if you want to we could go on with it, but erm... in the whole story she does have friends and relations but she seems like the kind of person who has total, when she was whole and in a state of good health, physically and mentally she would have had total domination of every one of those people they couldn't have told her what to do. She is a powerful, powerful and she will have been that as a single woman of however old she was when she was getting married. So you meet them later and they are all just like people who are kind of waiting for her to die so they can get her money, but without offending her, without offending her. Erm... and I wonder whether that kind of powerful will that could exert itself over people, and the world when thwarted where does that, she doesn't change her character does she it goes somewhere and it is almost like you can see it in the room.  She has done this... 

Frank:	Too old to change, and also what people term now learned responses probably.  

I:	Yes, say what do you mean by learned responses

Frank:	well just that was the way this has always been, it will always be forever so, and that is what I mean by...

I:	So a big question then, I would have to all of us is, do you feel, perhaps not you because you may be a bit young for this and I don't know about you Leslie...

Anne:	Lucky things ((laughs))

I:	Yes.  

Anne:	We are all young.

I:	But say if you have reached the ripe old age of let's say 35, 

?	Oh I am older than that.

I:	You are older than that, ok.

Frank:	I am a bit more yes ((laughs))

I:	but say you had, by that time in life...

Liz:	I was going to say it's not that far off yet ((laughs))

Anne:	Enjoy it. 

I:	You will have, or at least I know I have and had, probably for much younger, more like from my teens certain things that were habitual behaviours like very, very untidy, right I have still got that problem and it bothers me a lot, erm... and I have tried on and off over my life, my husband will be listening to these tapes one day and he will be laughing [43.44]

Frank:	Sitting there…

Mike:	She hasn't been trying as hard...

I:	But I have honestly tried, over the course of the years to be more tidy, but I can't seem to fix it. Now if that habitual, it is habitual whatever your will does about it, your old habits are very, very strong, and I just wondered if you get into the habit of seclusion of being cut off, because there is nobody to say to you oh, you haven't gone out yet or you haven't tidied up yet, 

Frank:	I actually did have a case of that the other day.  Because I was on my own for a week, minding my nephew’s house, and I really... my sister come down to London, I was in London all last week, she came down for a couple of days, and she basically runs my life. What have you done about this, what are you doing about that, I bet you... the first thing she come in the living room you have never moved out of that arm chair for 3 days have you. I said yes I have, who do you think cooked, who do you think did this, who do you think did that...  but this is just her hectoring, you know and I just thought, I actually thought about talking about seclusion, why don't you just go back to bloody Liverpool and leave me alone you know.

Liz:	I must admit when, it was when for example my parents are away for 3 weeks, and because I live with my parents, but when I am on my own I do make an effort to contact my grandparents, and they do you want lunch this, that the other and do actually contact people, I did joke saying, saying my friends would be screening their calls ((laughs)) off me...

I:	There is so many of them?

Liz:	Yes because I would be like, erm... 

I:	but that gets harder as you get older, making those habitual changes.

Anne:	what if you erm... you know you do change, then those people don't necessarily accept it, because she is... and that happens, that has happened to me...

Liz:	I found that when I have been really ill, and people actually start making assumptions about you, and then when you start getting your feet back together and you start, you know what I mean I am not the same person as I am when I was really ill, and they don't, it takes a lot, they still treat you like you are that other person.

All:	Yes,

I:	That's interesting isn't it and see I think here, she maybe at a point of possible change, having called for a young child to come in and do some playing or at least I am weary, and I want entertaining that's... could be possibly a gap if she had a very... I am sorry to go back to your sister but if she had a very outspoken sister, who came bustling in, saying a change I will give you a change get out in the garden, or something, but she hasn't.

Frank:	No

Gerry:	Do you think she suffered a great loss of face because of the social pressures of the time, you know if you were a spinster or you were unmarried or been jilted and she is such a proud, determined person something has happened which she couldn't control and she just refused to go out to face people again and that was it, that was her way of dealing with it.

Liz:	Also some people need to deal with stuff slowly, and then they run out of time and it's... and...

I:	Habits have set.

Liz:	People then give you that time to do it, by which time they abandon you also, it could be the case of this and then people don't... just assume she is stubborn, [47.15] haven't given her the time to actually take the steps slowly, even baby steps.

I:	Yes a lot of this erm... becomes very, very relevant in the story a lot of things you are talking about or anticipating.  We didn't offer you a cup of tea Leslie when you came in are you...

Lynsey:	I will get one.

I:	So Estella and her, she answered at last so this is erm... top paragraph on 43. Standing in the dark corridor, erm... but she answered at last and her light came along the dark passage, so when he got to the house and went in, Estella let him in, and she was extremely erm... snooty to him and she is a young lady a little bit older than him, so he is 12, she is 15 and she really despised him.

Anne:	But she is already... even by her light a different person because she comes along like a star so she is not... she is different.

I:	Hmm... Her light came along the darkness,  like a star yes.

Gerry:	It's interesting, 

I:	Yes so he feels her as a different kind of thing.  Miss Havisham beckoned her to come close, let me see you play cards with this boy, why, he is a common labouring boy, I thought I overheard Miss Havisham answer only it seemed so unlikely, I hope, you can break his heart.  What do you play boy asked Estella of myself with the greatest disdain, nothing but beggar my neighbour, miss.  Beggar him, said Miss Havisham to Estella ((Laughs)) so we sat down to cards.  It was then that I began to understand that everything in the room had stopped like the watch and the clock, a long time ago. I noticed that Miss Havisham put down a jewel exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up. As Estella dealt the cards I glanced at the dressing table again and saw that the shoe upon it, once white, now yellow, had never been worn. I glanced down at the foot from which the shoe was absent and saw that the silk stocking on it once white, now yellow had been trodden ragged. Without this arrest of everything this standing still of all pale, decayed objects not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed form could have looked so like grave clothes or the long veil so like a shroud.

Anne:	Can I interrupt?

I:	Yes,

Anne:	You said the collapsed form, that is so significant of what had happened to her. You know her response, I mean we have all read into the fact you know strong, but she herself fell in on herself at that moment, you know and...

I:	You mean psychologically?

Anne:	Yes and she was a collapsed form.  

I:	Yes and what would be needed, when a blow like that happens to you in a life erm... what would be needed to get you out of it, is probably either something that you might have...

Mike:	Therapy.

I:	What?

Mike:	Therapy.

((laughs))

I:	It can't possibly! Or at least friends or relations or other human contacts that would come to you saying something like you can't stay here forever.  Erm...

Liz:	But it would have to be sort of like gentle and sympathetic friends or relations you don't want someone who would make things worse, like a bull in a china shop.

I:	Yes but why do you think that therapy is the sort of modern way of doing that then, that does happen to people they do get stopped.

Mike:	I think it is within the health sector, erm... I think mainstream sector sees more kind of like society as a policing sort of way of... self policing [51.34] but yes I would say within health definitely.

I:	Could those therapeutic actions be undertaken by... I am trying to think of a lightweight example I mean it's a quite difficult subject but...

Sue:	I have thought of a happy one. My mom gave up on everything erm... and we couldn't shift her, really couldn't shift her out of that chair.

Anne:	My mom did.

I:	How old was she?

Sue:	She had had a lot, there had been a lot of problems she would go to the doctor, she would feel ill and she would come back furious I think her anger kept her going for a long time actually...

Liz:	doctors [52.12]

Sue:	They said it's my nerves but I think, we know now she was depressed but she would not accept it... so there was no way you could have got her to have had therapy, there was no way, she would be so resistant and you know she had a spirit and intellect that kept her going.

Anne:	How did you respond, how did you feel, did you accept it or did you try and cajole her, when I say cajole however gentle or not.

Sue:	we did try, but erm... she was so argumentative ((laughs)).

I:	It's interesting that such a tough spirit can also be profoundly depressed isn't it.

Lynsey:	[52.53 - talk over] turn in on itself and it becomes this sort of kernel of stubbornness.

I:	yes exactly.

Lynsey:	Unmoveable.  

Sue:	She really loved Dickens but she never, she would never identify herself with this. 

Lynsey:	No exactly

Sue:	She was resistant that too.  

Lynsey:	[talk over] Because I have never read this and as soon as I started reading Miss Havisham I thought oh my God this is my mom.  And the one thing... sorry...

Anne:	No go on.

Lynsey:	I was just about to say the one thing that has sort of had any sort of potential to sort of change the sort of family dynamic, you know the sort of dynamic in our sort of extended family has been me having my son 2 years ago and the thing is she sort of comes alive for my son you know she comes alive for Peter but with adults she is exactly the same as she always was with adults like to her like adults are like sort of like the bane of her life but she sees Peter as this sort of repository of innocence and like she will relate to Peter, well she will relate to young children because I think she can't stand the fact that I grew up ((laughs)) See this is turning into a therapy session! She wants me to be a baby forever and she can live it out through Peter and I am just hoping because it's a slightly mediated(?) relationship like she is a grandparent and not a parent it's not going to sort of do Peter's head in.

I:	It won't.

Lynsey:	It's different.

[54.21 talk together]

Anne:	I couldn't accept it, I mean it was the same for me and my mom died in March and she... even when I grew up and sort of had my sort of developed late, began to develop into myself, she wouldn't accept it and she rejected me and I had to leave home and she never you know and I couldn't accept the way she was. I felt you know, what is that poem Going up gently in the good night...

I:	The good...

Anne:	and yet afterwards I am thinking you know, you know when you are old and you do accept it maybe, maybe that is the best thing but I couldn't accept it I just couldn't accept the fact that she gave up at 60 before my dad died, when she retired and she never got off that settee again she just didn't get up and it was terrible and I couldn't accept it at all.  And I was wrong... I was always...

[55.21 talk over]

I:	It must be very common!

Anne:	I am [55.26] there is a mass of people.

I:	Random people in a room. That’s very odd isn’t it?

Lynsey:	Does it mean that it is a society thing because we are talking you know, repeatedly we are talking about women and is it that they are meant to have a certain role or historically meant to have a certain role and if that role doesn't fulfil itself then they feel redundant.  

I:	Well my mom wasn't a maternal kind of mom, and she didn't mind us growing up and actually wanted us to grow up, the opposite quickly you know...

Lynsey:	[talk over] yes you had to go...

I:	So you can come to the pub with me.  Different sort of mom but erm... and I feel her stuckness (?) was much more to do with almost like, not what you described in a way Frank of like not achieving, she is a very clever person, very, very clever person and she never became it. So she became a person in a pub.  

Lynsey:	Well that kind of happened to me as well.

I:	That happens. Thinking of my mentor and friend and god father of my son Brian [56.35] who you know Sue, I don't know if anyone else knows him, used to teach me at the university and he is connected to the Reader, and erm...  now if you saw his house in Birkenhead and again, tape regard this as utterly confidential, you would think a erm... a mad hermit lives here, you know he has gone for like 3 years with a broken window in his living room, covered over with a hessian bag, as if to stop the draft. 

Anne:	Is that the one who had the dog...

I:	Dog yes, so and his whole house is like that so if you went to one like that with dust on the top of the piano you know, and yet it is as if part of that is like he is a worse version of me and he hasn't got a spouse so there is nobody to say oi to but partly it's a kind of, I can only deal with so much, and so therefore I will deal with the important things which is my dog, Jane Hill, Ben, my teaching, and etc, but maybe it's I don't know it's just hard to manage all the bits of things.

Sue:	Those things just not as important.  Because he supervised my dissertation for my Masters and I would go ((laughs))

I:	You have been to his house?

Sue:	I haven't been to his house, I used to go to his room,

I:	Which is similar

Sue:	In the department, it was great I loved going into that room it was like entering another world.  And I would say I struggled doing that and working full time, and I would reach a low point just before I went to see him, he was, and I would talk to him about it and he would just, it was amazing it was almost like you could see the light bulbs coming on and his thoughts were coming out I would come away feeling I had risen again, and full of enthusiasm right I can do this, you know and erm... I don't know I wondered where it was coming from. So are they the important things?

I:	Yes, yes so it doesn't matter about the broken window.

Sue:	The one that got me because I was looking at Dickens's notes from America and erm... I was reading, oh yes because he smoked the pipe then, and he was behind this... it was almost like a different Dickens ((laughs))  he was behind all the pipe smoke and I thought I had lost him, I thought I had lost him...

?	What you couldn't see him?

Sue:	No, the thread I thought the thread had gone ((laughs)) and this voice came from behind the smoke I think it was I was reading Emerson(?) last night and I was thinking to myself, as you do... ((laughs)) it's amazing isn't it.  

I:	Ok  so might take on strange forms or... but you have got to keep them open somehow, I mean teaching kept them open for Brian, but I just think if my mom had had a career like that maybe something else would have happened to her, and maybe what you are saying about the society role for women, lots of women who have had to really concentrate only on their children, it is hard to stop that.

Liz:	I was going to say nowadays also you are getting into a situation where women are, you are expected to have a career and you know and a family...

I:	And children that is hard yes.

Liz:	Yes and it's like you know, often the family life gets pushed as a luxury and it has gone to the other extreme now.

Anne:	but my mom died in March and I still can't deal with it, I will never get over what happened. I just can't deal with it even now.

Lindsay:	[talk over] it's feeling that [01.00.00]

Frank:	It's still very raw.

I:	Yes. I think it took me about 12 years to get over my mom's death and what it meant, not just the death what it meant in terms of my relationship to her.  I remember one day seeing a woman in the supermarket and she looked a little bit like my mom, made me think of her and I suddenly thought, I forgive you everything and that was a long, long time after.  It is quite surprising what can happen in a supermarket.  Geri can you do me a favour and top up my hot water, or even cold water.

Liz:	I was going to say,  yes if you lose anyone who is close to you it doesn't matter, your mother or you know whatever relationship if they are close to you however long you have known them, it can take quite a few years to get to grips even to losing them, to you know... 

I:	Never mind sorting out the bad part of the relationship.

Liz:	Even if... even if there was nothing, you know baggage to the relationship it can take a lot, I mean society expects you to bounce back like that, and in reality you really bounce like that if they are erm... quite distant to you.  

I:	Yes, yes. Alright so shall we go on. I will go back to the beginning of that paragraph and actually I am just wondering would anybody else take a turn at reading starting at it was... 

Anne:	Can I have a go...

I:	Yes thank you.

Anne:	It was then I began to understand...

Liz:	where are we sorry.

I:	Sorry page 43, bottom paragraph. Beggar my neighbour, Beggar him said Miss Havisham.

Anne:	So we sat down to cards.  It was then I began to understand that everything in the room had stopped like the watch and the clock, a long time ago.  I noticed that Miss Havisham put down the jewel exactly on the spot from where she had taken it up.  As Estella dealt the cards I glanced at the dressing table again and saw that the shoe upon it, once white, now yellow had never been worn. I glanced down at the foot from which the shoe was absent and saw that the silk stocking on it, once white now yellow had been trodden ragged. Without this arrest of everything this standing still of all the pale, decayed objects not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed form could have looked so like grave clothes or the long veil so like a shroud. So she sat, corpse like as we played cards.  The frillings and the trimmings on her bridal dress looked like earthy paper, I knew nothing then of the discoveries  that occasionally made of bodies buried in ancient times which fall to dust in the moment  of being distinctly seen, but I have often thought since that she must have looked as if the omission of the natural of day... natural light of day would have struck her to dust.  He calls the knaves Jacks this boy said Estella with disdain before our first game was out, and what coarse hands he has and what thick boots.   I had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before, but I began to consider them a very indifferent pair. Her contempt form... contempt for me was so strong that it became infectious and I caught it.  She won the game and I dealt, I misdealt, as was only natural when I knew she was lying in wait for me to do wrong and she denounced me for a stupid, clumsy labouring boy.  You say nothing of her remarked Miss Havisham to me as she looked on. She says many hard things of you but you say nothing of her.  What do you think of her? I don't like to say I stammered. Tell me in my ear, Miss Havisham said, bending down.  I think she is very proud I replied in a whisper, anything else? I think she is very pretty.  Anything else? I think she is very insulting

((laughs))

	She was looking at me then with a look of supreme aversion, anything else? I think I would like to go home and never see her again though she is so pretty. I am not sure that I shouldn't like to see her again, but I should like to go home now.  You shall go soon said Miss Havisham loudly, play the game out.  

I:	Stop there then that's excellent, lovely thank you very much.

Liz:	Lovely read.

I:	Yes lovely reading. Erm... 

Anne:	I noticed reading that because I didn't notice at first how erm... she is there... Miss Havisham is there in her decay which is surprising, but it is repetitive as well because once white, now yellow that is repeated a few times so it's...

Lynsey:	Yes that is really strong yes.

Anne:	It is not erm... 

I:	Thanks very kind of you, thank you very much.

Anne:	You know it just shows that you know there is... although she thinks how surprising she is with this and she has got so much to boast about with the surprise and the shock of what she is in fact it can be quite dull really.

I:	And I wonder if it's as if the child is, it's that sort of looking again, you go in and you think something and then later on you notice erm... thinking when my son went he is dyslexic and he went to a tutor for some years and the very first time we went, erm... they took us in the living room, and they had this huge golden retriever, lying in front of the gas fire, he like totally dominated that entire living room, and erm... previous times when we went another time he seemed more like an ordinary dog, but that first time I just remember going in to the room and it was boiling hot and this dog ((laughs)) as if they had the fire on for the dog, he was just lying there yes I am so big aren't I.

((laughs))

Liz:	I was going to say I can't really... our dog erm... ended up, well it was lying...

I:	Roasted.

Liz:	Lying in front of... literally roasting on her back, and this stupid dog... 

I:	But it's just that funny feeling of what you see the first time but when I think of that dog and you know I knew him for years, erm... in the end he... I don't know a different perspective comes over you, over time but what he saw that first time was like a bride, he still had that like a bride in his mind, and then look at her socks are ragged, like a bride white, no yellow, it's as if they are two different bits of consciousness banging up against each other.

Lynsey:	It's the same thing if you know, he is forced to look again at his hands, and be ashamed of them, I never thought of being ashamed of my hands before. You know that pair of sentences there, it's just incredible about erm... you know how we are sort of forced to take you know, take class inside us, you know internalise the shame, it became infectious and I caught it.

I:	That is terrible isn't it?

Lynsey:	Yes

Anne:	but isn't Estella so stereotyped in what she says I mean, you expect that you know, it is so stereotypical of you know ((laughs))

Liz:	I mean I think... I mean it sounds weird but she is being painted in this picture of being [talk together] full of herself

Lynsey:	Is she Miss Havisham's maid?

I:	No she is a sort of adopted daughter.

Lynsey:	Oh so Miss Havisham has kind of made her in her own... made her in her own fashion.

Anne:	She has made her in her own right to take revenge on men.

Lynsey:	Yes

I:	But at this point we don't really, all we know is she has opened the door and let him in and being very snooty. We find out later that she is sort of adopted erm... and that Miss Havisham has done that on purpose.  Erm... so, she has been brought up to be this person.

Anne:	I thought it was very modern where she... where she said play the game out it seemed, you know that is sort of very modern kind of erm... in literature or something that kind of you know you have got to play... well there is a poem isn't there about you have got to play the game, is it about erm... the war or...

I:	Yes play up and play the game.  Yes, erm... yes I am thinking what you said about Leslie about internalising that bad feeling, erm... and it is class and she makes it class very clearly doesn't she, erm... he calls the knaves Jacks and what coarse hands, and what thick boots they are all the sign that he is a working boy, erm... and yet what he takes inside feels personal it's her contempt for me, was so strong and that Dickens uses the word infectious, as if it was like breathing in germs, like TB or you know some airborne terrible disease. 

Gerry:	It is very strong isn't it Jane, how you could pick up vibes so quickly from somebody else and then suddenly you feel very, very small, because he hasn't been with Estella that much and yet she is absolutely reduced him to [01.09.51].

I:	Yes but this is real isn't it, people can do that...

Gerry:	Oh yes this is absolutely what happens yes.

I:	And do do that to you. You know, if they want to.  

Anne:	but I wondered reading that is how... how long that feeling will stay with him, because erm... whether he will get over that feeling as a momentary feeling or whether it would stick I didn't... I don't...

Sue:	I think the word infectious implies that it will stick at least for... You know it's not going to go straight away is it.

I:	He is going to go round for quite a while thinking where shall I put them.

Lynsey:	Yes, feeling dirty.

Anne:	and the one thing a blacksmith's apprentice will have... will be dirty, hard...

I:	Big, dirty

Frank:	 [talk over] [01.10.34]

Anne:	Working hands.

I:	Workman's hands yes. 

Gerry:	So when he is in the blacksmiths he is not having these negative feelings about himself, but in another setting, he is seeing himself in a completely different way.

Anne:	And yet then you have to put it in context... sorry put it in context with the book because he is not exactly comfortable where he is, is he? In his home life.

I:	I am just wondering, I mean you obviously know the book and I don't know if other people do, but I mean we could read it... if you would like to...

Sue:	Yes, would like to oh yes.

Lynsey:	Is this the one with Wemmick in it?

I:	Wemmick yes, oh Wemmick.

Lynsey:	Somebody was talking about... I was talking to somebody and they were talking about Wemmick the other day and he said it is in Great Expectations and I said crumbs I have never read it, I really should read it.

Sue:	Is he the one he refers to as the aged....

I:	Aged P is parent.

Lynsey:	Oh that's what my brother-in-law calls, calls my in-laws the Aged Ps.

((laughs))

Lynsey:	I thought he made it up.  

I:	Wemmick has a little drawbridge to separate his house from the world...

Lynsey:	Oh right...

[talk together]

I:	So we used to have erm... a clothes airer... 

?:	I remember those.

I:	I don't know what they are called but we call ours the Wemmick because of that, and then you say something oh it's on the Wemmick, and they go what is a Wemmick, oh it's that.  Ok lets us press on, would somebody else care to read a bit? Good, so we were at... 

Anne:	Play the game out. 

I:	About 10 lines down page 45.

Frank:	I played the game to end with Estella, and she beggared me. She threw the cards down on the table when she had won them all as if she despised them for having won me... been won of me.  When shall I have you here again said Miss Havisham let me think. I was beginning to remind her that today was Wednesday when she checked me with her former impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand, there, there I know nothing of the days of the week I know nothing of the weeks of the year, come again after 6 days do you hear? Yes ma'am. Estella take him down let him have something to eat and let him roam and look about him while he eats.  Go Pip. I followed the candle down,  as I had followed the candle up and she put it in the place where we had found it. Until she opened the side entrance I had fancied without thinking about it, that is must necessarily be night time. The rush of the daylight quite confounded me and made me feel as if I had been in the candle light of the strange room many hours.  You are to wait here you boy said Estella and disappeared and closed the door.  I took the opportunity of being alone in the courtyard to look at my coarse hands and my common boots, my opinion of those accessories was not favourable.  They had never troubled me before but they troubled me now, as vulgar appendages. I determined to ask Joe why he had never taught me to call these... call those picture cards Jacks, which ought to be called Knaves I wished Joe had rather... been rather more genteelly brought up and then I should have been so too.  She came back with some bread and meat, and a little mug of beer she put the mug down on the stones of the yard and gave me the bread and meat without looking at me, as insolently as if I were a dog in disgrace.  I was so humiliated, hurt, spurned, offended, angry, sorry I cannot hit on the right name for the smart. God knows what it's name was, the tears started to my eyes, the moment they sprang there, the girl looked at me with a quick delight at having been the cause of them, this gave me the power to keep them back and to look at her. So she gave me a contemptuous toss but with the sense I thought of having made too sure that I was so wounded and left me.  By then she was gone. But when she was gone I looked about me for a place to hide my face in and got behind one of the gates in the brewery lane, and leaned my sleeve against the wall there and leaned my forehead on it and cried. As I cried I kicked the wall and took a hard twist at my hair, so bitter were my feelings and so sharp was the smart without a name that needed counteraction.

I:	Very good, lovely thank you very much.  Poor boy.  Poor kid.  Erm... that list of words when he can't find the right word, I was so humiliated, hurt, you read it really beautifully yes.

Anne:	Spurned.

I:	Yes he keeps saying that she is... what is the word he, insolent which is a strange word for a child to use, of somebody older than him isn't it. But I don't know how one would erm... define the word insolent but it is a particular thing isn't it, it's... is it like

Lynsey:	Casually cruel isn't it.

I:	Yes it is casual as if they can't be bothered with you, but what else does it mean?

Frank:	It's an arrogance...

I:	[talk over] yes there is arrogance in it yes.

Sue:	It's like an act of sullenness is it?

I:	Yes it's like they can't be bothered with you, arrogantly you are not worth something.

Liz:	I think... I think that this girl was actually trying to put herself up rather than 

I:	put him down
Liz:	put him down. You know because some people stand on... stand on your head to get up. I mean I am only saying that because I have just finished a book and I was reading this thinking she sounds so like this awful character in this book ((laughs)).  You know who was also like putting people down and like...  [01.16.45 - talk together] and stuff like that.

Lynsey:	she is a social climber through being adopted by Miss Havisham. Was she also an orphan?

I:	Yes.

Lynsey:	Oh right. 

Frank:	I think the term might actually be the pecking order ((laughs)).

?	Yes, yes.

?	Yes

?	yes it's that feel.

Gerry:	If you are insolent you don't always have to even speak, there is a suggestion there of body language.

Lynsey:	Yes

Gerry:	Because people can be insolent without... they can project that without even speaking. It's about the whole person being insolent, the insolence in them, so that's interesting.

Anne:	[talk over] I thought about, thought about the class thing when he can roam around while he eats.

I:	Yes but he can't sit at the table.

Anne:	Yes

?	I wouldn't happen, the way she put the food down on the floor.  

Lynsey:	It's funny though because he has managed to say it all without self pity, it's funny he just... he just sort of... he just sort of says it so sort of matter of factly but so expressively that there is no self pity there. 

I:	Yes

Anne:	And it struck me as you know it's a game between the sexes isn't it you know sort of you know that people... it isn't a good thing to play games and this is, this is a game between them you know.

I:	Yes and it's very serious game, when the tears start to his eyes I was so humiliated hurt, spurned, offended he doesn't know, he knows the feeling doesn't he, but he doesn't know what to call that. I cannot hit upon the right name for the smart that... brilliant, and feel the soreness of it hit.

Sue:	Physically hit.

I:	Yes as if he has been yes.  Damaged, physically damaged. God knows what it's name was. The tears started to my eyes and then the moment they sprang there, the girl looked at me with a quick delight in having been the cause of them.  

Liz:	I would have punched her, I am sorry.

((laughs))

Liz:	The violence in me.

Frank:	Your violent streak would have come out yes.  

I:	It's like that... you know that, you sort of wonder he is alert enough to notice all these things that are happening and then this gave me the power to keep them back. That's an amazing little interlude between two people, I am really hurt, I see you are crying ah-ha, and no I am not.

?	It's a tension isn't it.

I:	It's very, very I don't know what to call it...

Mike:	Bold

I:	Bold sort of interaction between the pair of them, very exposed also as if they both know...

Anne:	The rules(?), the rules [01.19.22]

I:	Yes almost...

Anne:	[talk over] almost instinctively

I:	like a biological rule. Yes instinctive.  Erm... with the sense of [01.19.30] of having made too sure that I was so wounded, it was deliberate, she... and he knew it was and he was able therefore to counteract it in some way and yet after she had gone. And I am thinking back to your feelings of... of probably similar outrage and annoyance at school.

Frank:	Yes

I:	You know, of in a sense that the school system and probably some particular people make you feel 

Frank:	Yes

I:	You know bad. Erm... what you do in relation to those directly and then that can mean going round the back and just crying and pulling your own hair out and being, you know kids suffer those things.

Frank:	But it did affect me so much I didn't want to go to school in the end, I just had that much and the strange anomaly to it, my partner I went to school with her but there is 5 years difference between me and her, and 4 years ago we went back because they opened a memorial garden for staff and pupils that had died. I always swore I was never going back it was a closed door, she said come on now Frank you know I loved school come back with my please, please come back, please come back with me and she sort of talked me into it and I went back and what was the first thing I saw on the fence. The memorial garden, this particular teacher that had given me absolute a dog's life,

Gerry:	Really?

Frank:	  died 1997 and of course what did I go and do you, you know the way you say you build up I 
	  went and opened my mouth I said that old so and so, I said made my life a bloody hell for 5 
	  years. Unfortunately I was tapped on the shoulder by a rather nice gentleman, do you mind 
	  not talking about my other like that, so that made me feel absolutely... I called her all the 
	  old so and sos I could lay my tongue to, and he said it's not  for her granddaughters 
	  [01.21.14] I said well accept my apologies I didn't know and then that made me feel 
	  absolutely dreadful. But I was only giving vent to my feelings then. 

Sue:	Yes but didn't you want to say that?

Frank:	I didn't need to say it no, but... 

Sue:	Didn't you?

Frank:	No.  But it was, I could have said it...

?	[01.21.29] ((laughs))

Frank:	Yes I should have said it but I said it in the wrong place, if I had just said you know...

Anne:	What I was... it hasn't been tempered by time that it's still as raw as it was then.

Frank:	No it's a lot less raw I will be honest with you Anne, but I just think every time I think of her and see her, and saw her name I just said to Cathy my other half I said I think about the misery and the upset and the this and the that she caused me, I said and that was it. I still...

Gerry:	Did she teach you a lot?

Frank:	Yes she taught us English and [01.22.05]

Gerry:	Oh and that would have been your favourite subject.

Frank:	That was my favourite.

I:	What a shame

Frank:	Because I... because I was really heavily into it and writing my own stories and going in for competitions as a teenager and winning short story writing competitions and that she didn't like it.  

I:	Ow...

?	[talk together ]That's terrible

?	You [01.22.22]

Frank:	Yes.  Basically I told her the day I left... 

Gerry:	Did you?

Frank:	What I thought of her.

Anne:	How difficult is it to go when you are so angry and hurt. I mean he has got to go back here hasn't he?

Frank:	Yes

I:	Yes

Anne:	How difficult to go when your feelings are so outraged and so fundamentally upset, go day after day.

Frank:	Well... basically I didn't go day after day I became truant. And I reached an impasse with my father because my father actually said to me you are not getting anything out of it son are you.  And he had his own business at the time my dad, he said well you are coming to work with me, 3 days a week, he said you go to school the other two.

I:	That was good.

Frank:	Yes

Lynsey:	did you go the other two?

Frank:	I did go the other two. He said it is an agreement he said you come into work 3 days with me, but he said you are not just coming to work to sit around and drink biscuits, eat biscuits and drink tea and what have you he said you are going to learn, top to... you are going to try to learn the business top to bottom.

I:	What was the business?

Frank:	He was an haulage contractor.  

I:	good

Frank:	So he used to take me in and that was my period of growing up I will be quite honest, it was.

Gerry:	Could I just ask you how did that lady react when you confronted her?

Frank:	When I confronted her...

?	When you told...

Frank:	I actually confronted her two hours before I was due to leave school.

Gerry:	But how did she react?

Frank:	Well what happened was, I will tell you how it come to a head.  We were in a group, a lot of us were leaving it was our last day 16 years of age, we were all leaving and she said now you are all going out into the big wide world, very patronising, a group of disabled students obviously and I said yes, and I thought I have been out in the big wide world for a year now, going out to work 3 days a week and doing this, doing that.  Well she made a particularly crass and nasty remark about a student that was there, a lad in a wheelchair and I said you are just right out of order, so I said you... I said you are still, you are a very, very bitter and twisted woman. And she said right she said along to the headmaster's office, I was 16 years of age, just under 6 foot, 12 stone... 

((laughs))

Frank:	and to be quite... she said off to the headmaster's office now, 

?	brilliant

Frank:	I said do you know in 10 minutes, she said yes, I said that bell is going to ring I will be walking out of here for the last time and never coming back.  So sorry, Fuck you, fuck them

((laughs))

Frank:	and the headmaster's office I will go 10 minutes early ((laughs)) 

I:	Good.

Frank:	that is how I faced it. And I never, ever until 2008 when my other half dragged me back I never ever went back.  And I was sorry I did then.  

I:	The thing that physically going to a place, like you had all that in your memory and presumably what happens to most of us is those things kind of bed down, you get used to them and occasionally think of them but...

Frank:	Oh yes

I:	But going to the place.

Frank:	When I saw the name on the wall, I just... it was the proverbial red rag it was.  

Lynsey:	I mean I think about school as well it's still... I mean I left over 20 years ago, it is still incredibly raw for me.

I:	Is it?

Lynsey:	And it's been knocked down now, I went back just before they knocked it down

I:	[talk over] just to have a look at it.

Lynsey:	[01.25.27] and it was I mean basically a shed, you know it was a shed,  again it wasn't a special school it was just a school for kids that, I suppose you know what... a generation earlier would have been a secondary modern, it was nominally a comprehensive but it was a state comprehensive and it was basically a shed, just put up for us to sort of sit there and... you know have... you know Mr Gradgrind for 5 years ((laughs))

I:	and do you still feel you resent it?

Lynsey:	Oh yes, yes, yes. Not personal, not a personal resentment on behalf of all of us who were there.  Because... because we just erm... you know, nothing was expected of us you know.

Frank:	Oh I can say that, nothing was expected of us.

I:	I think we definitely should read Great Expectations, start again at the beginning.

Frank:	Yes

?	Yes

I:	Because everything we are talking about is pertinent to that book.

Liz:	I just feel because like you are saying about special schools and what not, there are certain... there are certain like your grammar schools and what not, who would actually look down on people who aren't the Cambridge type of [01.26.44] you know not even got the difficulties and it is like you won't get into there and people with your GCSEs get Ds and Es if anything you know, and trust me I have had a teacher saying that to me ((laughs)).

[talk together]

Frank:	It's like when we all left school we all followed the same thing. We all meant... because we were all disabled and in a disabled environment, you all went and there is 5 years as I say between me and my partner we all followed the same career path. We went to commercial college, we went to work experience, I left school at 16, went for a year to commercial college, it was what was expected of me and then went into my dad's business. And, worked for the business.

I:	Did you feel you learned anything at the commercial college?

Frank:	No because all that was, was of its time, and it was a [01.27.33] school. I went there to skive ((laughs)).

Anne:	How do you feel... do you feel, do you feel erm... in yourself, the sort of at home in yourself even though the way you were treat by that teacher or do you feel a certain amount of well, not quite at home in yourself?

Frank:	No I am very... I consider myself very well at home with myself because I think you know I see people without being sanctimonious here or nasty, that are disabled that like... can't make, basically can't make a decision for themselves I still keep in touch with a lot of school colleagues, as I say I am actually a partner with one now and you know you say to them, you are not doing any one any harm by just making your own mind up but they are used to having the decisions... I made my decisions I was responsible for myself from when I was let’s say 12 years of age.

I:	What this is making me think what you did with your teacher is like... is the opposite of what he has done here where the feeling goes into him and he said erm...

Anne:	He tries to...

I:	he hates his own hands, I never thought of being ashamed of my hands before, but I began to consider them a very indifferent pair, her contempt for me was so strong that it became infectious and I caught it. You didn't catch it?

Frank:	No

I:	You know it was as if you already had luckily or by family...

Frank:	It was family and it was also strength of character, yes.

I:	To not let that in.

Lynsey:	So that's like an inoculation isn't it?

I:	((laughs)) it is yes.  What a nice way of putting it yes.

Frank:	Yes [01.29.11]

I:	It is yes. So she couldn't get inside your own opinion of yourself.

Frank:	No. No.

Anne:	Is it alright to ask, is it Lindsay, from your experience at school which you just said all of you were in the same boat, I mean were you able to separate what you did later from that?

Lynsey:	Yes well... we sort of, we were all in the same boat that we were all at school but... but at the time I objected to the, I was treated differently as well but I objected to it because they basically... the teachers, erm... kind of said they kind of made an exception you know they said oh you are going to do... it doesn't matter that you are going to this school because you are the type of kid who is going to do well anyway.  Or I can see that you are going to do well and so I used to get, because nobody was put in for GCSEs and things like that, and so a lot of my GCSEs I have sat in a... I sat on my own in a room because they basically thought it was only me that was worth spending 30 quid on to enter the paper to put in for the paper.  And so, you know I mean this was 92 so it was just over 20 years ago and you know I think you know these days it... a lot has improved in that most people are actually at least entered erm... whether or not they are equipped over the course of their time at school to actually you know... 

I:	We have still got a big problem haven't we?

Lynsey:	Oh of course, absolutely.

I:	You know 56% of kids haven't got 5 GCSEs.

Lynsey:	((talk over)) oh I know but... but 

Liz:	I think there has been some progress but not as much as there should be.

Lynsey:	Oh no of course not no. 

Liz:	I mean I went to a high school which had it had a grammar school streak in it, so as long as you stayed in the top sets you were alright...

Lynsey:	And if you weren’t

Liz:	I think that my experience of it, because all the people who I knew in my sets were all out of the area, but the different other classes  where you didn't have sets it was a different... you just... I just saw what was happening with the other kids and I bet you that my experience and their experience was totally different and even you know, even having this sort of good streak at high school, I went to this grammar school and got a snotty teacher who was the careers adviser and my form tutor who actually wanted me kicked out because I wouldn't toe the line, because I did all that at... I did all that at  Prenton and I wasn't going to do it there you know ((laughs)).  And there was one thing worse than me, and there was another girl who came from the high school down the road.  Obviously knows [01.31.56] basically Prenton High [01.32.01] just like total snob you know and to my understanding I mean I left when I was... this is less than 10 years back, you know it is not that... 

Sue: 	Honestly this pattern. 

?	[talk over] its terrifying isn't it.

Sue:	I went to a high school in south Liverpool but was told I didn't belong because I was the kid from Kirby because we had moved from this rough area to this nice area and I was told by teachers in that school I didn't belong.

I:	Teachers?  By teachers.

Sue:	I didn't belong.  And this is the 60s I am talking about how many years ago is that ago and all this talk is bringing it back to me. 

Frank:	Yes

?	[01.32.40]

Liz:	Things are not that different just literally two like round the corner [01.32.45]

Frank:	[01.32.51]

Liz:	It was a snotty grammar school you know round the corner you have got the high which, I mean it doesn't have a better reputation I mean I... my parents did everything they possibly could to get to stop me from going there, but and you got... [01.33.09]

I:	You want to say something...

Frank:	We are talking about stuff coming from areas. I come from Toxteth which was a rough area, my sister qualified as a teacher, I went in and said to this particular teacher that I was having the run-ins with about my sister is a teacher she said, a teacher... from the tenement block in Toxteth where you come from. Oh I don't think so, are you sure she is not the dinner lady. I am sure, she  can come and tell you if she is a dinner lady or not.

Sue:	But to get back to Dickens.

[talk over]

Sue:	I said on Wednesday.  Wednesday night we are reading a Tale of Two Cities and I have said it before, it seems to keep coming up again how relevant he is.  

I:	Yes, very, very relevant. Yes.

Sue:	It's amazing.  

I:	Yes the clothes have changed but the problems are still the same. Yes, yes. Go on...

Liz:	What is wrong with being a dinner lady.

Frank: 	Absolutely nothing.

I:	Nothing but his sister was a teacher.

Frank:	But she was a teacher.

?	[01.34.13] dinner lady in my day but you know...

Frank:	The only thing with her being a dinner lady she still can't cook ((laughs)).

Anne:	My experience is totally different because according to what sort of I have always felt there was nothing wrong with the school, it was me and I felt that all along the actual thing isn't the work or the school, it is me and therefore it's very... it's so, you know it is very, very difficult because I try to and I can't and it's always been me and I have internalised the fact it wasn't the school, it wasn't you know erm... it was in fact me making my way and I couldn't make my way through it.

I:	Partly surely that responsibility does fall with the school, even if the school is perfectly ok, that you would have a pupil in the best of circumstances, still thinking I can't flower.

Anne:	but the school...

I:	[talk over] there is something wrong with that.

Anne:	The school did do it's... they did do its best and I still couldn't, it was always me and it was always my mom and me, against you know trying to make our way against things which were right and which were good and we couldn't do it. 

Lynsey:	But it sounds as though... it sounds as though your mom sort of co-opted you into that situation. Sort of basically took you on as a sort of ally you know, she felt maybe against the world and so took you on as an ally in it, in order to have an ally and then sort of you know you sort of picked up that sense of not fitting in.

Anne:	I know that I have been told that a lot of what I feel, which I think is what I feel actually comes from my mother, which I can't believe that to me my mom at that time was totally supportive and totally the opposite to what she became later which was totally rejecting.

I:	Yes children are very, very dependent on the adults around them aren't they. I do want to go back to this... back to this passage here.

Frank:	[talk over] back to that yes.

I:	Go back to the beginning here, lets just see him enter this room.

Anne:	Can I fill out the form.

I:	Ok

Gerry:	I need to finish at 1.30 as well.

I:	Ok that's fine.

Frank:	I do too to be honest.

I:	Oh right, ok pass us a few forms round then will you. Here she is with her forms.  Because 3 of you have got to go now.  

Anne:	What question is that question again?

I:	Erm...  

Lynsey:	If we read the whole of Great Expectations will we be able to do it by the...

I:	We won't...  I was just thinking...

Lynsey:	... if we carry on...

I:	We could carry on. I mean I think for the research project period what will happen is after  is it 6 weeks we swap but we could start...  I know this is a Friday morning you are in my diary so once the 6 weeks is over with the other group whoever wants to could then just come back and we could carry on. 

Liz:	[01.37.25] I was going to say never mind the project let's stay here ((laughs)).

I:	Oh yes but we have got to stick to the design though haven't we. So perhaps it would be better to save it till after the other 6 weeks, and then say to everybody if you want to keep coming we can have a Great Expectations reading group. That would be good wouldn't it?

Liz:	Because I am getting taxis over here what would...

I:	Perhaps there is some way we could work out how to do that, I don't know but we will...

Liz:	I mean I am quite good at getting over and stuff like that, I am used to getting to various places but I am still not entirely certain where we are in relation to anything ((laughs)). I mean I know pockets of Liverpool, doing different voluntary stuff here in Liverpool but keeping those pockets and I know certain bus routes and I know...

I:	Yes of course, it's a long trek.

Liz:	It's quite a long walk ...

Lynsey:	from Mossley Hill station.

I:	It is yes.

Gerry:	You should get a local map I have got  a big map at home. I can see all the roads and where the park is.

[talk together]

Liz:	I mean I tend to use an A-Z a lot which I am quite keen on, but I know 82 which goes, or is it 86.

?	86.

Liz:	I know there is like a couple of the 80s ones and you know...

?	Not that close they turn off.

Liz:	So 86

?	86 / 76 or 75 or 86C.

?	I think there is a bus that goes up Green Lane.

Lynsey:	That's the 86C.

Gerry:	Is that the 86C. Because they give you the map on the back of them, the way they go. 

I:	We have only got a few minutes left, so don't mean to say nothing about that we will try and sort it out, I don't know how we will do it but we will see what we can do.  Erm... could we just go back to when Miss Havisham is talking to him, so it's on page 44, she won the game and I dealt.   

[background talking]

I:	She won the game and I dealt, I misdealt as was only natural when I knew she was lying in wait for me to do wrong and she denounced me for a stupid, clumsy labouring boy.  You say nothing of her remarked Miss Havisham to me as she looked on. She says many hard things of you, but you say nothing of her.  What do you think of her...

Gerry:	Bye...

I:	Ok bye Gerry, see you next week, thanks for coming. 

Liz:	I think the fact that softens the image of her in a sense, because this is obviously observing whether or not this is the type of play which, sick play which she wanted but it does give a certain softening of her....

I:	[talk over] she seems to be making, it could be a friendly comment but you look extremely doubtful ((laughs)).

[talk together]

?	She is staring

Lynsey:	[01.40.30]

Liz:	The first reading of it was that it is softening her image a lot but then I thought no this maybe the play that she actually wants. Not the play to order as such but... 

I:	Yes 

Liz:	this is...

I:	[talk over] so this is a game for her.

Liz:	a head.

I:	Yes, yes.

Sue:	She is trying to provoke him I think, [01.40.52]

I:	Grace can you just move the lamp out of the way for everybody, thank you. Erm... and yet I do wonder whether, and we will see when we come to the whole book...

Frank:	Thanks...

I:	Bye see you next week, thanks for coming.  

Anne:	Can you get past?

Frank:	Yes

I:	Even that sort of tell sort of tell me in my ear says Miss Havisham bending down, there is something intimate about it, even if she is manipulating him and it is as you said a sick head game or whatever it is.

Liz:	I like to think it isn't but... after reading it again...

I:	Yes you are probably right.  And yet...

Anne:	[talk over] she is very much erm... herself she, it isn't so much coming from her as she has been trained, as we were talking about how dominant adults can be, she herself, as he has come in a certain way, she herself has been trained in that way and so she is herself as not erm...

I:	Are you talking about Estella?

Anne:	Yes, yes it isn't, she is as much a victim of all the things we have been talking about as everybody else. 

I:	yes that's right. 

Anne:	I don't want to go...

I:	Never mind, work must be done, see you next week. Bye. 

Anne:	Bye.

I:	That something like genuine intimacy of relationship could still happen in a sick situation. That is weird but probably true.  So, 

Lynsey:	Possible

I:	Yes because humans exist on a lot of different levels so the fact is Miss Havisham is being at this particular moment quite kind of him, in a situation where he feels scared and embarrassed and vulnerable. And if somebody is quite kind to you in that kind of situation and especially if you are not old enough to realise what is going on...

Lynsey:	You are going to be honest.

I:	You might be... you might be... 

Lynsey:	Unguarded.

I:	Yes a bit and he is, isn't he so he does answer in a straightforward way I think she is very proud I replied in a whisper.  Anything else? I think she is very pretty. That's a vulnerable thing for him to say. Anything else?  I think she is very insulting. She was looking at me then with a look of supreme aversion, she... as if she... it's so deliberate isn't it, anything else? I think I should like to go home.  And never see her again?  

Liz:	She reminds me of, you know in children's, children's books where you have got like an evil witch and like a child and then...

[talk together]

Sue:	Yes because she is [01.43.51] allowing him to be private and whispering in her ear but are her responses loud enough so she can hear, so she knows what he has said.

I:	Yes, she does, yes.  Erm... I am not sure I shouldn't like to see her again but I should like to go home. And again so someone is insulting, rude, horrible, unkind, etc, etc, and yet he still might want to see them again.  Erm... that is, a strange multi-layers of being a human being isn't it?  She is also very, very attractive. And he is attracted to her.  Because remember that bit you pointed out, or was it Anne, erm... at last her light came along the dark passage like a star you know she is a moment of brightness.  One of the things I was thinking about when erm... Frank was reading was that bit at the bottom of 45 where erm... he realised, it's amazing that it's daylight and until he read that sentence I hadn't really noticed how much I was imaging this whole thing in complete darkness it was as if... I did think it was night the same as the character does.  Erm... I followed the candle down as I followed the candle up, and she stood it in the place where we had found it.  Until she opened the side entrance, I had fancied without thinking about it, that it must be night time and that is exactly what happened to me as a reader.  

Liz:	but also because I mean, because like we wouldn't sit in a room with everything shut and the lights on unless you work at.. well perhaps...

I:	((laughs)) unless you worked for City Watch.

Liz:	Some people might ...

((laughs))

Liz:	No but like if you are home playing cards, why would you sit with the lights on and the blinds down if it's daylight outside.

I:	Yes unless you were...

Liz:	When its night-time then you may...

I:	So when you have got the curtains drawn by day, it is a funny feeling isn't it, it is partly sort of saying don't come in I am not looking out, making the connection with out there, that's why you do it sometimes.  Hmm... funny feeling. I would like to stop with that one and just read a poem if that's ok that goes with it and erm... and Angie has chosen all these poems to sort of sit alongside whatever is being read in the prose. So this is... It was Long Ago by Eleanor Farjeon. I don't know if you say Farjin or if you say Fai-an I don't know whether you pronounce that J or...

Liz:	It depends on where she is from.  

I:	Right, do you know what kind of even name it is?

Liz:	Because if she is French it will be Farjon.

I:	Farjon, ok I will say that then shall I? 

((laughs))

I:	I don't know Farjon.  

Liz:	No because like I think it could be you know...

I:	Elean-nor ((laughs))

Liz:	Because that does look French like, it isn't German. 

I:	I don't know I feel she is an English poet I think but I don't know how you pronounce her name, anyway never mind. As I child I always thought it was Farjin. 

	I will tell you shall I something I remember.  Something that still means a great deal to me.  It was long ago. A dusty road in summer I remember. Mountain, an old house and a tree that stood, you know behind the house.  An old woman I remember, in a red shawl with a grey cat on her knee humming under a tree.  She seemed the oldest thing I can remember.  But then, perhaps I was not more than 3.  It was long ago. I dragged on the dusty road and I remember how the old woman looked over the fence at me and seemed to know how it felt to be 3 and called out I remember, do you like bilberries and cream for tea? I went under the tree. While she hummed and the cat purred I remember how she filled a saucer with berries and cream for me, so long ago.  Such berries, and such cream as I remember I never had seen before. I never see today you know.  And that is almost I can remember, the house, the mountain, the grey cat on her knee, her red shawl and the tree and the taste of berries, the taste of the berries and the feel of the sun I remember and the smell of everything that used to be so long ago.  Until the heat on the road outside again I remember, how the long... how long the dusty road seemed to have for me no end, you know.  That is the farthest thing I can remember, it won't mean much to you, but it does to me.  Then I grew up, you see.  [01.49.17] Do you like it...

Sue:	I do, I do. I like the way I remember is repeated and it's as though she is taking us with her in this, through this memory.

I:	[talk over] and remembering more and more things, erm... all the time.

Sue:	Because she says I remember but then she says, you know. 

I:	Yes

Sue:	And seem to know.  

I:	Like trying to include you in it you know.

Sue:	Yes. I like... I don't know it's given me sort of a feeling.  

?	A nice feeling

I:	Would you like to read it again to us.

Sue:	Yes. I will tell you shall I, something I remember. Something that still means a great deal to me. It was long ago. A dusty road in summer I remember, a mountain, and an old house and a tree that stood you know, behind the house. An old woman I remember, in a red shawl with a grey cat on her knee, humming under a tree.  She seemed the oldest thing I can remember. But then perhaps I was not more than 3. It was long ago. I dragged  on the dusty road and I remember how the old woman looked over the fence at me, and seemed to know how it felt to be three, and called out I remember, do you like bilberries and cream for tea. I went under the tree and while she hummed, and the cat purred I remember how she filled a saucer with berries and cream for me, so long ago, such berries and such cream as I remember I never had seen before, and never see today, you know. And that is almost all I can remember, the house, the mountain, the grey cat on her knee, her red shawl and the tree. And the taste of the berries, the feel of the sun I remember, and the smell of everything that used to be so long ago. Till the heat on the road outside again I remember and how the long dusty road seemed to have for me no end, you know. That is the farthest thing I can remember. It won't mean much to you, it does to me, then I grew up you see.

I:	Do you feel the end is sad or...

Sue:	Hmm

Liz:	Kind of like [01.51.40]

Mike:	They are your [01.51.42] I think of being young. 

I:	Yes almost like your only memory of it, 

Mike:	Yes and once that had... once that memory has gone you can only remember what is happening now.

I:	Yes like ordinary life but this feels almost...

?	Magical

I:	Magical or amazing.

Liz:	It's like when I grew up you see you lose that magic.

I:	Yes

?	I was thinking that.  

Liz:	Life is magic and you see things in a certain adult way...

I:	Yes and then more ordinary, whereas this feels as if it could be anywhere in the world, any culture, any it's like...

Lynsey:	It's really universal.

I:	It is, it's... a massive sort of experience for that child.  Erm... I love the way the thing is so cumulative that by the time you turn over the page and you are getting, when she says and that is almost all I can remember, and you think oh she is telling you it's little, but then it becomes this huge list, the house, the mountain, the grey cat on her knee, her red shawl, the tree, the taste of berries and...

Liz:	Basically the whole experience.

I:	Yes everything, it's big really, really big. [Pause] It's a funny line she seemed the oldest thing I can remember.  As if that is mixing up erm... the age of the woman, and the length of the memory or the length of this person.

Lynsey:	Oh yes I see what you mean yes.  

I:	Memory in a way.  

Liz:	I am actually wondering how old the old woman actually was. ((laughs)) About 40. Because I remember when  I was at school, even someone who like gosh they were 20 something and I thought that was...

((laughs))

Lynsey:	Seemed ancient.

Sue:	As a three year old you wouldn't think oh that person knows what it's like to be three, this is the memory of it isn't it?

I:	That's right it's an adult remembering.

?	Yes

I:	Which is particularly why Angie has put it with the Great Expectations extract, because that too though you get a very strong sense of the child is an adult's memory.  It is interesting how much it provoked us today to rehave some of those child memories.

Liz:	I was going to say a lot of my child memories, have actually... because I don't have, I don't have much memory erm... prior to 2005, so that is in some ways probably a good thing ((laughs)).

I:	That must be very, very peculiar though.  I don't know perhaps not I am trying to think of things that I know that there are huge gaps in my memory so perhaps it's... not much different to that then I don't know.  

Liz:	I mean there are certain like random events and that's about it.  Erm... very, very little from apart from the odd I remember getting told off... told off at the last school for playing erm... arm wrestling with the lads ((laughs)) but I don't remember that much else.  Erm... 

Sue:	They are conscious memories aren't they, what about if you get... because they say smell is strong.

Lynsey:	You get sort of Proustian memory.

?	Yes so if you smell something and you are not expecting something just comes to you. 

Lynsey:	[01.55.47]

?	That is a different memory isn't it?

Lynsey:	That's a sense isn't it.

I:	That's why she says here and the smell of everything that used to be, so long ago as if... now they are all activated it's almost can you smell the privet, [01.56.02] close it I suppose.  

Lynsey:	Grass....

I:	Yes grass and erm... did... can... I mean if I said can you remember your earliest not for you but just to see how others compare to yours.  Earliest memories do they seem connected are they [01.56.28] do you get like flashes?

Lynsey:	No they are really episodic.  I can remember something my earliest memory is actually my first birthday party which is pretty early.  

?	Gosh

I:	Wow that's amazing!

Lynsey:	I can remember just a flash of it, I can remember my mom and dad and I was sitting in my high chair, I can remember my mom, dad, nan and granddad, coming into the room with the one candle on the cake, it was a round cake with smarties and I remember them coming in and all singing happy birthday to me but it's just that flash just one little flash and then I have got another of me being about 2, erm... being on holiday on a beach but it being so cold that I had to wear my outdoor suit, on the beach on holiday and that's another memory.

I:	we have all had that holiday ((laughs)) yes. 

Liz:	I was going to say my memory is pretty... it's like that right up until 18, 

Lynsey:	Very, very episodic.

Liz:	yes, normally based around getting  black marks at school and other... 

((laughs))

Liz:	[01.57.34]  events like that.  

I:	That must be difficult Liz because so much, it feels like so much of our own sense of who we are has partly, as we discovered when we were talking to each other today, things like about my mom, I mean that is not there with me every minute of the day but it is a big part of... so if you have lost a lot of memory, and yet you seem a very definite person, that is an interesting...

Liz:	Saying that my parents have [01.58.10] from 18 in a sense as well so they have been really supportive and that's...  I mean and even, even before my grandmother died, she died when I was... I mean it was 2007, so 2 years erm... but prior to that I didn't really have much memory apart from, because at one time I got told off because I picked a flower from the apple tree and got told off because I thought oh pretty flower give it to my nan ((Laughs)) got told off saying it would have been an apple that.

?	One less. 

Liz:	((laughs)) but it's like, all... all... all memories are really like that, where like getting black marks or getting told off by my dad for picking apples and stuff.

I:	That's a shame.  

Liz:	((laughs)) so I don't remember all the rest is like, because there’s photographs of me going out different things I have got no memory

Lynsey:	You don't remember do you things.

Liz:	of actually going but I must have done because I was there ((laughs)).

Sue:	What about dreams as a subconscious memory if you like, because I remember a very, very vivid dream I had, I can't remember how old I was when I had it, I described it to my mom and she said that is the corridor of my dad, when I was 2, and this is partly where my mom's problems started I think, and my mom was pregnant with my brother and my dad was... she was told my dad would only live 6 weeks, he was 25. 

I:	Oh...

Sue:	And it's a corridor in Clatterbridge Hospital, and it's a long corridor I should go and see if it's there, with a long window and it had the most beautiful flower garden. Lawns and flower gardens and she said I was... she took me there to see him and he had like a cage across his legs, and I was very close to him it seems, and I screamed the place down and wouldn't go near him. 

Lynsey:	Very scary.

Sue:	He lived as a paraplegic for 30 odd years, which was really hard for my mom but great for us because he brought us up.  

Lynsey:	What did he have a spinal disease or?

Sue:	Yes. So erm...  yes.

I:	So it wasn't a dream it was...

Sue:	It was... 

I:	It was a memory.

Sue:	As I described it to her she said that is the exact scene of walking down that corridor and I don't know where...  do you block a memory then if it's something bad do you know what I mean?

Liz:	I was going to say your brain is weird when you are actually sleeping because it brings loads of things, a variety of things which means then you get like a mismatch ((laughs)).

Sue:	It suddenly come back all those years later because I think I was an adult.

I:	I have been reading a really interesting book about memory erm... erm... Frank Cottrell Boyce the writer was with me at a do a few weeks ago and he mentioned this particular guy who is famous in neuroscientific literature for having had epilepsy and very, very bad epilepsy and they did an operation and took part of his brain away.

Lynsey:	Is it the man with the shattered world?

I:	It is called, well he has no memory it is called like Living in the Present Day or something like that. And so he, lost his memory, I think he could remember like up to when he was about 6 years before the operation but then he lost everything from there and so each day he couldn't make any new memories so but what they found was if they said look John this is how you make a cup of tea, teach him to make a cup of tea, and then the next day they could say now do you remember can you make a cup of tea John and he would say yes, and he would make it and they would say do you remember me teaching you to make the cup of tea yesterday no. But he could remember the thing.

Liz:	The important bit.

[talk together]

I:	That is so interesting like mechanical procedures he could remember, but he couldn't remember the narrative of his own story.

Lynsey:	[talk over] the relation, the relational aspect. 

I:	Yes so they said teach you to do a complicated wooden puzzle, do it again and then he could do it the next day but not that he had done it before.  So one of the things, and anyway why Frank told me about it was he said sometimes this man would get very sad, and even start to cry but not know what was the matter and he had a little card in his pocket that he would... they would say take your card out then and it would say, dad died, with the date of his dad's death and that was why he was sad.  But he didn't know, until he... unless he had it, he didn't know his dad had died. 

Lynsey:	Right

I:	but he still had the feelings of the sadness.

?	That's hard.

I:	Very, very hard. When Frank told this story I think in some odd way we are all a bit like that. We have got the feelings but we don't know what they...

Mike:	Psychic

I:	Psychic you think? How do you know it's psychic.

Mike:	It's like an unconscious thing isn't it? Sometimes you can think something erm... and then you know find the next day it was actually that date.  That time, long ago.

I:	but we would call that psychic but there could be lots of things that that was...

Mike:	its coincidental as well but...

I:	Yes or just parts of our consciousness that we don't really understand properly or...

Lynsey:	[02.03.42]

I:	You are very good at putting your hand up, very insistent yes.

Liz:	No just if you are going back to you know Great Expectations bit where he had all these feelings but didn't know what word...

I:	[talk over] yes...

Liz:	what was going on.

I:	What a very good connection. Lovely. Yes.  We need to go, forms... 

Sue:	Can I ask before we go, would we have time and I don't know if it would be relevant but you know the Dickens's story the Haunted Man, is that the one where he loses his memory something happens with his memory.

I:	Can't remember the memory but we could read that next week, it is short enough to read in a session like this, ok I will bring it. The Haunted Man right.  

Sue:	I am thinking of the Signal Man that story, the Haunted Man is the one where he is sitting by a fire. 

I:	Isn't the Haunted Man quite long?

Sue:	There is a shadow growing in the corner.

I:	We could do it over a few weeks.

Liz:	yes

I:	Ok alright will do.  

Lynsey:	I have bought some [02.04.44]

I:	Thank you very much. 

?	thank you

I:	thanks everyone that was lovely.

?	Thank you. 

Liz:	I don't think I have got a pen in my bag but I have got a pencil.

Lynsey:	I have two, I have a spare.  

Liz:	Thank you.  

Sue:	Talk about being untidy I need to do something about this bag ((laughs)).

I:	That's the problem with big bags.  

Sue:	It's like me, it's terrible. 

Liz:	Have you got a spare pen?

I:	sorry thought you had got one.

?	There you go, there is another one.

I:	Thanks. 



	









