Silas Marner, George Eliot

[33.10]
Anne:	And then it goes on to say: ‘And the mother’s love pleaded for painful consciousness rather 
	than the oblivion’. So life was painful to her, the things that she was thinking or the 
	experiences she was having of her lot in life.

Someone else pick up about the mother’s love then, so why would that ‘plead for painful consciousness’. 

Mike:	Conscience.

NN: Er well consciousness like awareness of the situation so if you think you’re either unconscious, or I think I’m awake, and I’m not out of my head.

Lynsey: 	You’re saying it’s her conscience that’s speaking to her.

NN: As the mother of a child. Thank you.

Sue:	She can’t look after the child

NN: If she goes. If she lets herself. So conscience, yes ok thanks Mike:.

[later on 43.25]
NN: During the last few weeks, since he had lost his money, he had contracted the habit of opening his door and looking out from time to time, as if he thought his money might somehow be coming back to him, or that some trace, some news of it, might be mysteriously on the road, and be caught by the listening ear, or the straining eye. It was chiefly at night, when he was not occupied in his loom, that he fell into this repetition of an act for which he could have assigned no definite purpose, which can hardly be understood, except by those who have undergone a bewildering separation from a supremely loved object. In the evening twilight, and later, whenever the night was not dark, Silas looked out on the narrow prospect round the stone pits, listening, gazing, not with hope, but with mere yearning, and unrest.

Let’s stop there for a minute cause I’m interested to know what you think about that. She’s going to some effort to say he’s doing this slightly odd thing, like leaving the door open and looking out. But she says ‘he could have assigned no definite purpose’ for this act, ‘which can hardly be understood, except by those who have undergone a bewildering separation from a supremely loved object.’ And I’m just trying to think – if anybody could think of an example of that from real life. What would that be like?

Anne: 	You know in a trivial way it’s like when you’re looking for something that you’ve lost, and 
	you keep looking in the same place, even though common sense tells you you’ve already 
	looked there, it’s not there. But in a bigger way I suppose it’s people sit looking out the 
	window when they’ve lost a person, either they’ve left them or they’ve died or

NN: Yes, and you know they’re not going to come, but you still might look out. 

Frank:	I knew a case of that myself. My grandfather, when he retired from work, actually used to go 
	out on the road, the same time every morning, stand at the bus stop and let the bus go, let 
	the driver come. And he had never got out of the house for about two years. And I’d say why 
       and he’d say broken hearted that’s why, because my work was everything, and a whole lot. 
       Well just why I could never work it out. He was getting up like he was going to work but. 
       Made an awful long day for him it did but. That pattern of behaviour went on for a year or 
       more.
       
[46.45]
NN: And what you were saying about your granddad, it’s like that habit, the loss of the job is really painful but the habit is a comfort.

Frank:	Yes the habit, yes,

Lynsey:	Cause it’s the anchor isn’t it.

Yes

Frank:	every morning it’d give him something to hold onto. He’d never get on the bus.

NN: He’d just wait for it.

Frank:	He’d just wait for it to come, religiously every morning, 7.15, go down and get his paper then 
	and come home. And make my breakfast and get me ready for school.

NN: Yes, bless him. 

Lynsey:	Cause it’s like he needed to see the bus coming and going just to make sure that, to reassure 
	him that the world was still carrying on. 

NN: Was still going on. 

Lynsey:	But not necessarily without him, but it was still carrying on so, it needed to carry on. 

Frank:	That’s right. I think he ached for normal service to be resumed. That was it.

NN: Yes, yes.

Liz:	I think sometimes if you’ve lost something, be it for example this character losing his money, 
	or even like it might be a drastic change, for example you’re retiring and suddenly your life’s 
	different, it’s wondering what – it’s a future that you don’t know. In the past the future’s 
	always been – there.

NN: So you would do the repeats just because it almost like holds off the unknown future.

Lynsey:	Yes, yes, exactly.

Gerry:	See I can imagine it, if you had a pet that was lost, leaving the door open and going and 
	looking, and just hoping by some miracle the cat’s going to appear over… A great sense of 
	it’s out there somewhere, it might just come back. 

NN: Yes, and I think you’re right. 

Lynsey:	Cats do that a lot don’t they, they just disappear. 

Liz:	Don’t get me started on cats.

Lynsey:	Oh sorry, right, oh dear. 

NN: He does feel it like a pet or something, it is like it is almost living. 

Gerry:	Yes it’s precious.

NN: And in the bit before this in the book when we see him with the gold, it’s not like money, he treats it like something he really loves.

[later 57.19]

NN: But the memories seem so strong. He only lets the little sister come into his mind, and then ‘whom he had carried about in his arms for a year’.

Anne:	It is obviously something which he had not recovered from. But is it a case of something you 
	have to recover from. Would it have been right to have recovered. Is it something to recover 
	from or not? Are the things which you don’t recover from 

NN: You just get used to them.

Anne:	Yes.

Liz:	You want to learn to deal with it properly rather than recovering from it as a sense.

Anne:	I mean they’re always saying now, critical about people you know when things happen, 
	counsellors are immediately present. And yet when you hear about people who have talked 
	earlier they just had to get, they didn’t. I mean and obviously, he hadn’t had these 
	counsellors and

NN: Well this is an interesting question isn’t it that 

Anne: is posing. Do you think that humans, if we weren’t in the twentieth century, do we have a kind of inner adjustment mechanism. In the old days when it was – not to go into your problems – did people cope with them do you think or… no. But in a way, we still don’t really in a way do we, or does talking help, or not. Come on, what do you think. 

Lynsey:	Well, it partly depends on the person, and partly depends on the person that you have 
	access to…

[Anne: continues with her question: ‘should it be resolved?’]

later 1 1:19
[thinking of his sister]
NN: That was the first thought that darted across Silas’s blank wonderment. Was that a dream.

I want to ask about blank wonderment. What do you think that is, and you know why not. You could easily have ended that sentence with the first thought that darted across Silas’s mind. But she’s really chosen this other thing, blank wonderment.

Lynsey:	Sometimes, well quite often actually, sometimes when I wake up, the second I wake up, you 
	know I’m not sure if I’ve had this sort of like flash of a memory or a feeling, a sort of sensory 
	sort of feeling. I’ve never sure whether it was what I’ve just dreamed or it was something 
	that really really happened, and that’s sort of very blank. And that often has this sort of, I 
	don’t know what the word is you know this kind of spectral feeling, you know like it’s a flash. 
	And it’s sort of got no brain to it you know what I mean, it’s got no thinking to it, it’s just 
	purely sensory.

NN: So the blank is almost like consciousness is not there, but some other part of consciousness, some other part of your mind

Frank:	It’s probably Silas I think in my opinion coming back into consciousness with his narcoleptic 
	state.

Lynsey:	Oh yes, course yes.

Yes, so there’s some of that. As well as 

Frank:	Did I dream that. I’ve come back in, yes. Come back in to kick.

Liz:	I was going to say you know often if you’re actually asleep and you’re dreaming and you 
	wake up, there’s a bit of like disorientation about what

Lynsey:	Absolutely yes. What’s real, what, whether you’re still dreaming, yes.

Liz:	And if you’ve got a tendency to fall asleep or to go into that state randomly, it puts question 
	marks about what’s real, what he’s dreamed, what’s this…

[later 1  13:14]
Gerry:	There is a parallel isn’t there with Great Expectations, because both of these people have 
	had a perceived injustice, and it’s made them withdraw completely. So there are parallels.

NN: Yes there are, that’s right. And where Miss Havisham took in Estella and has brought her up, and it looks as if Estella hasn’t entered her troubled consciousness, you know it’s sort of like you can break his heart, she said to him didn’t she. But this looks a different

Liz:	I was going to say I was reading this in the sense that even the mixture of his narcolepsy and 
	also in terms of his withdrawal from society, it’s sort of like a waking up to reality in a sense, 
	from both perspectives.

NN: And it’s funny how that is what can pull him, what he reaches for is what he thinks is his gold, but what he touches is something warm.

Lynsey:	Yeah it’s like real gold.

It’s real. Real gold.

Anne:	But is a lot of the gold, is it, I mean if someone stole a considerable lot from us and we’d 
	worked very hard, then. But his it doesn’t seem to be bitterness or anger, it just seems to be. 
	It’s a different response…

NN: Someone else say, what’s the word. Bewilderment is the word she uses isn’t it. But it might be almost, I don’t know

Frank:	Resignation to his lot.

Yes, there’s that too, and it’s like as if he’s stuck with it and he can’t imagine

Lynsey:	He kind of half expected it with people anyway. He half expected it to happen anyway.

NN: Oh, that’s terrible isn’t it to imagine it connects up with his old loss, the loss of the, getting chucked out, the loss of the community. Loss of his friend, everything.

[later 1  20:32]

Anne:	…he’s saveable

NN: Yes he is.

Anne:	It’s not that that’s it, he’s an oddity. He can be reached.

NN: Unlike, it looks like, Miss Havisham. So there is a, they’re similar, but it takes on the same thing. 

Lynsey:	He’s reached straightaway hasn’t he.

NN: Yes and he’s reached her soon. There was a cry on the hearth, the child had awaked, and Marner stooped to lift it on his knee. Just in that one sentence.

Lynsey:	He doesn’t just go…

NN: It’s the ‘and’ that does it isn’t it. But there was a cry on the hearth. The child had awaked, and Marner stooped. It’s like, he responds to the cry straightaway.

Anne:	But it’s ‘it’. Stoops to lift ‘it’. 

NN: Yes – 

Anne:	All the time. It isn’t a case of…

Liz:	He doesn’t know what ‘it’ is. From waking up back to reality in both senses in a sense. I don’t 
	think to actually look into detail

NN: Is it a girl or a boy, how do you know, you don’t know. 

Sue:	It moves onto ‘her’ as soon as he starts feeding her. I think the practicalities of…

NN: Where’s that then.

Sue:	He had plenty to do tough the next day. Made her lift her little eyes. 

NN: Oh yes that’s interesting.

Anne:	There’s something so cinematic you know you said it had been on film, because when the 
	mother settles to sleep, the child comes into focus. And you can imagine it cinematically.

NN: That’s the link between those two scenes, yes. 

[later 1 31.14]

NN: And yet he had a dreamy feeling that this child was somehow a message come to him from that far-off life. It stirred fibres that had never been moved in Raveloe, old quiverings of tenderness. 
So the possible re-establishment of his faith, or even faith in people, or in love or – is just, even almost straightaway

Frank:	It may be more hope than expectation.

NN: Yes.
 
Liz:	I was going to say, this new, this baby, or toddler, has come in and it’s a new life in a sense.

NN: It is. And maybe, for him too. 

Lynsey:	Potential

***

‘Rich’, R. S. Thomas

[1  41.18]
Liz:	But I mean cause like for example ‘estate’ and ‘investing’ and stuff like that, it’s all adult 
	concerns which a child doesn’t have because their parents do it all for them. And it’s having 
	– not a childish approach but a  childlike approach to adult affairs, and a childlike way of 
	looking at it.

NN: Investing the interest in the child mind. I mean children are completely interested in almost everything, aren’t they, in ways that we aren’t. We screen them off. We know some things we’re never going to get to understand.

Frank:	Yes. A child goes on and on and you say to the child, give it a rest, shut up. Why’s that? 
	What’s that? 

NN: Yes, exactly yes. And that’s quite wearing for us, because

Frank:	Yes, it can be.

NN: we can’t process all the information. That’s why they’re so exhausted though isn’t is, when they go to sleep, children

Lynsey:	If they go to sleep.

NN: Yes, if they go to sleep. Says you, as the mother. But when they do go to sleep, they really deeply go to sleep, as if they’re just really… 

Lynsey:	We were talking about that 

NN: Oh dear.

Lynsey:	He just cat naps, he can’t switch off. 

NN: Can’t he.

Lynsey:	He woke up this morning like that. He’d been quite ill in the night, cause that’s why I was
       late. It was a bit touch and go really, cause he had been quite unwell in the night. And he 
       had some Calpol about five in the morning, and he was all pale and sweaty. And then he 
       slept. He did actually sleep deeply actually, he woke up at quarter to nine this morning, 
       really late. And he opened his eyes and he went Venus, Saturn, Neptune, Pluto, Mars, Earth, 
       and Venus! ((laughter)) Like that. 

Sue:	How old is he?

Lynsey:	He’s twenty-tee months.

NN: Blimey!

Lynsey:	He’s a bit weird.

Frank:	That is.

NN: That’s quite something. 

Liz:	I was gonna say future Armstrong.

Lynsey:	Well there you go. This is what I mean about not switching off though, he was just waiting to 
	go ping. But he goes, you know this, the gold light, ‘the sun’s jewellery’. If I pull up his 
	blackout blind in the morning, and he looks up and says it’s a beautiful sunny day!

Liz:	I was gonna say, I’m not that sad.

NN: But a deliberate adult thought of thinking right I’m gonna, I’m gonna hold onto that. I am gonna keep some of that in me. You’ve got a bit of that still in you, you’re a child aren’t you. 

Frank:	Surely have, yes.

NN: Yes. In the child mind. 

[later 1  49.22]

NN: So it’s two sides of it then. So ‘men draw their curtains’. On the one hand that feels quite nice when you do it usually. Unlike you shutting yourself in. ‘Against beauty’. Mmm, you shouldn’t have drawn them. But do we. Are we afraid of being even overwhelmed by beauty or being too moved or

Lynsey:	That’s [01.49.49]

NN: you know.

Lynsey:	But yes, I mean it’s interesting cause I’m thinking of somebody I know, and they’ve got quite 
	a sort of categorical way of looking at the world. And basically saying you know I have to, 
	you know he actually earns quite a lot of money. But he says oh, you know we’re just an 
	ordinary working family. He’s a high-rate taxpayer but he says we’re just an ordinary 
	working family, you know we have to work this hard. We have to do this. We have to have a 
	car, because we have to drive our children to all these activities. And we have to do it like 
	this, and we have to have a ginormous mortgage. And he basically sort of says the whole 
	time you know the Man made me do it. You know what I mean. He feels like they have to 
	have this ginormous income, which he personally doesn’t think is ginormous. It’s just that it 
	all goes. He always says oh I’ve never got any money. But I know that he earns, on his own, 
	more than what me and my husband earn together, and yet I feel like me and my husband 
	live a really really comfortable lifestyle. But he also doesn’t seem to notice just the little 
	things, kind of thing. And ends up, because he’s quite starved for time, you know he buys 
	the things that probably I would be inclined to make, I suppose because I’ve got a bit more 
	time. Cause I remember we were in a teashop in the Lakes all together you know about five 
	years ago, and we were in this shop and this woman came out with a tray of scones, just 
	come out the oven. And I went ooh, hot scones, like that, and I got really excited about 
	these scones. And he looked at it and he said, you really do take pleasure in small things 
	don’t you. I says yes I do, they’re scones…

Frank:	That’s good sometimes, yes.

NN: Mmm, so, he’s drawn his curtains, in some sense. 

[1  55.30]
NN: So can we, if you would leave your curtains open a little bit. ‘Ah let me, when night comes.’ I don’t really know what he means by night here. I don’t know whether he just means, you know are we talking about drawing the curtains at night, or are we talking about the end of things. I’m not sure.

Liz:	Also night is like darkness and

NN: Yes ok so when darkness comes. Trouble even it might be.

Sue:	Hard times

NN: Hard times, difficulties.

Sue:	And who is he asking to let him?

NN: Mmm. ‘Ah, let me.’ Yes. It’s like a prayer, isn’t it? Or a wish, a self command.

Frank:	It’s wish, wishful, yes.

NN:  ‘Ah let me.’ You know when you’re trying to make yourself do something. 

Lynsey:	Does that mean you just talk to yourself don’t you. You go come on, come on!

NN: Be brave. That sort of feeling, is it that. ‘Ah let me, when night comes, offer the moon unhindered entry.’

[later 1  57:48]

NN: Now, I just wonder whether, am I alone in being afraid of that, and is that partly why I haven’t thought about it for the last thirty years. I just don’t want to think about frightening things like that. But you, you’re thinking

Mike:	I’m probably more afraid of other people dying than myself, I think. 

NN: Right, yes, and that is partly why my fear has grown up. After seeing you know my father-in-law die, and just thinking mmm that’s what it’s going to be like and I’m going to have to do that one day. Which I’ve never thought about as a young person.

Liz:	I was going to say any of us could actually walk out of here and be knocked over 
	straightaway so you don’t, you know you don’t know the day of. If you think about stuff, 
	then you’d never do anything. And as you say about over 50 odd, you may end up living over 
	a hundred, so stop thinking about it.

NN: Yes true. Well I’ve tried to do that by day…

Frank:	I sat at a deathbed 18 months ago, and got asked by the person who was in the deathbed, 
	‘am I dying’. And the answer was, we’re all dying. And the doctor was in the room with us, 
	and said, that’s a damn good answer. We are all dying yes. 

Lynsey:	It’s just a matter of when.

Frank:	Yes, just a matter of when. 

Lynsey:	Yes my nan said that actually just before she 

Frank:	Yes, well she just got hold of my hand, it was my aunty, she got hold of me and she said, am I 
	dying? I went, we’re all dying. She was, and

Lynsey:	Yes, well my nan sort of said it differently. She said, this was a week or two before she died, 
	she said, I keep thinking I’m gonna die. And I said well, I think I did say something to her like 
	well you know, well yes, yes you are going to, but nobody knows quite when. And I did know 
	the end was near, but I mean do you actually say you know looks like the end is near or do 
	you say. But the thing is I had no idea at that point, I thought she might rally and live another 
	tee years or something you know. She was ninety by then.

