Mike:	Morning.

Anne:	Hello

Mike:	Been to feed the ducks. 

Anne:	Oh.

Mike:	They were quite noisy today.

Anne:	I heard, I don't know whether some were flying over as I walked in.

Mike:	geese.

Anne:	It wasn't you feeding them but I just heard them at that moment ((laughs)).

Mike:	Probably the geese. 

Anne:	Hello

Mike:	Hiya

Anne:	You sit there.  Were you able to drive in today or did you get a taxi? Sometimes you have driven haven't you?

Liz:	No.

Anne:	Oh I thought one time you drove and found the car park or something?

Liz:	No I have always been in a taxi, it is the taxi driver who has been getting lost.  Yes.  I don't know what has happened to the other lady who was supposed to be coming with me because she just stopped coming. So I think it's a bit off because we actually [03.02] away further we are not... luckily I have been given a phone number for her because it's not the first time she hasn't turned up and if she doesn't answer, I called her twice and I thought if she isn't answering drive on and we went past where we were supposed to pick her up and and the driver said drive on, I was like yes ((laughs)).  But I think this taxi driver is getting used to coming here.  Because I always find that the Wirral doesn't talk to Liverpool and Liverpool doesn't talk with Wirral.

Anne:	Do you come from the Wirral?

Liz:	Yes

Anne:	That's a long way isn't it?  Sort of erm... for a taxi.

Liz:	Yes.  I mean it's not, I mean I do know certain bits of Liverpool, to be quite honest I am not entirely... I know Wavertree erm... and I know we sort of passed Wavertree to get here but I know certain pockets, where they come out this way and linking them is another thing.  

Anne:	whereabouts on the Wirral do you live?

Liz:	Do you know Bebington?

Anne:	yes

Liz:	There.  

Mike:	I was over there yesterday with my dad. We are going to get a new car.  

Liz:	Whereabouts?

Mike:	it was the Volkswagen place, on the, you know that road where there has been loads of accidents, I don't know if that's...

Anne:	Is that by the shops?

Mike:	Just when you come out of the tunnel and go down the road, there has been loads of accidents on it, I don't know what it's called but there has been loads of accidents on, there has been about erm... 100 odd accidents.

Liz:	are you talking about round Rock Ferry way?

Mike:	Oh hang on it was erm... no, it was what is the village, we were by that village erm... Port Sunlight that's where we were. It's nice round there.

Liz:	Port Sunlight is 15 minutes walk from mine. The other way but yes, I think you were talking about the Old Chester Road is it or the bypass?

Mike:	It's the one, at the end of it there is the shipbuilders you know, the erm...

Liz:	Cammell Laird

Mike:	Cammell Laird yes. 

Liz:	it will either be the bypass or it will be the Old Chester Road. Erm... one or the other, the bypass bypasses all the likes of you know we normally call it the New Ferry bypass because it bypasses New Ferry type of thing.  

Mike:	It's nice though, it's like a model village isn't it in Port Sunlight. 

Liz:	Have you been round the Lady Lever art gallery?

Mike:	No, no my dad was talking about that though, saying...

Liz:	It's art in itself.

Mike:	 is it good?

Liz:	Yes I have been round loads as you can probably imagine I just walk there.  

Mike:	Is it free to get in?

Liz:	Yes, yes. For now ((laughs))

Anne:	It has a cafe as well hasn't it? It was entirely the collection of Lord Leverhulme and he had another house and I think when they had the sale, when he died they had an auction or something and I think it went on for days and days and days the sale of his collections, and part of his collection is in the Lady Lever, I think I am right about that but I think there is something about it in Lady Lever about that.

Liz:	Yes there is a whole, there is a big section of stuff to do with him.  You think that being local I should know ((laughs)).   It is worthwhile going while it's free.  Because erm... I get the impression the council is trying to cut anything which is non-essential, which is like most things apart from their own pockets ((laughs)).  

Mike:	Allerton golf course is supposed to be going.

Anne:	What?

Mike:	Didn't you know about that?

Anne:	No!

Liz:	What is that?

Mike:	Allerton golf course.

Anne:	they are going to build on it?

Mike:	Well I don't know if they are going to build on it, I don't know, but it's going to be earmarked for sale.

Anne:	Oh that is terrible. It is so beautiful, it's so... it's so lovely just walking there.  

Liz:	I always say that golf is a game that spoils a good walk.

Anne:	yes it's not for the golf, I mean I have never played golf but it's just such a lovely and it's such a large and beautiful area, it's lovely when it snows because nobody is there, and you have got the whole place to yourself and it's completely virgin snow. Oh... 

Liz:	Are you alright for drinks.

Anne:	there isn't a spoon.  Was that in the Echo?

Mike:	Erm... it was first of all someone told me about it, a while ago now.

Anne:	I had heard something about it but I was hoping it wouldn't happen.  

Mike:	Yes I know well I don't know if it's for definite.

Anne:	I don't know what the Carmelite Monastery will think if they start building houses,

Mike:	Who

Anne:	the Carmelite Monastery.

Mike:	what's that?

Anne:	There is a big Carmelite Monastery being built next to it. You know Old Allerton Road,  go down the Yew Tree road and turn left onto Old Allerton, a little way along it was Maryton Grange, but it's now they have built a whole Monastery erm.. it's a massive, massive place.

Mike:	Monastery?

Anne:	Monastery yes, it is an enclosed order, and it's up there and erm... it's completely and utterly enclosed and they have landscaped the gardens and if you go to the golf course you just get a view over it and they have got particular vegetable plots just like an old monastery... even if you just go up the road you can't see anything...

I:	A bit cold in here today.

?	Good morning

Mike:	Morning

Anne:	Hello

I:	Hi. Ok?

Sue:	Yes thanks. 

I:	Well done.

Sue:	6 minutes I timed myself, a 6 minute walk as fast as I can I think it took me longer 
	this morning, excuse me Liz thank you.  

I:	We might need another chair up there. I think Frank said he couldn't, he is not coming today so. There you go. So we are still awaiting Geri, and Lindsay and the new lady.

?	Anne

I:	Another Anne right, so Frank is probably not coming today, he sent a message in yesterday.  Nice erm... 

Sue:	Oh thank you.

I:	Did you make it?

Sue:	Well I went... I was visiting my son in Canada earlier in the year and I knew I would be upset coming home because they are not, it wasn't quite a year since they had moved and [11.02] I was leaving my grandson, so I had been sent to this wool shop in Oslow. Have you seen how long the roads are, I must have walked 2 miles looking for this shop and when I got there they were absolutely lovely and I said to them I need a project for when I get home. Well it's the hardest thing I have ever done ((laughs)).

I:	I am not surprised it's absolutely gorgeous. It's lovely. 

Gerry:	Morning,

?	Morning Gerry.

Sue:	I sometimes think what else could I be doing ((laughs)) instead of tackling and... although I had to use my brain to think about it you know. 

I:	It's just lovely, very, very nice.  

Sue:	It was only a 3 star though I have done things up to a 4 star.

Gerry:	Don't trip over that... 

Sue:	tatty old boots, I desperately need new ones but what can you do.

Gerry:	these little black boots... and they are flat.

I:	Yes flats, good, very good. This is all strange to you this, women's boots. 

Mike:	Yes

I:	You know the requirement for heeled shoes, you never have to worry about that. 

Sue:	every place I work.  

I:	Whereas erm I made a decision recently not to wear high heels ever again and I am just trying to just get used to them, wherever I go it's going to be flats.

Anne:	They are much more comfortable.

I:	Much more comfortable.

Anne:	I think some of the shoes you see now, because I know high heels give style but some of them are such they look silly, very uncomfortable when you look at them, people walking in a very uncomfortable way.

Liz:	If you can't walk in them you are just going to look stupid ((laughs))

I:	Well the idea is to stand still in a lot of these.

Liz:	Tottering between taxi and restaurant, restaurant and taxi.

I:	Yes, yes, yes that's right. Are you alright with your water or?

Mike:	I am fine yes.

I:	Fine ok.

Sue:	Does anybody else want a hot drink?

I:	Could you shut the door over Mike? 

Mike:	Yes

I:	Thanks. So erm... new Anne I don't know where she is, but Frank isn't here this week so we will make a start and erm... get going. This week I thought we would move on to love. So we are on page 247 and this is an extract from Jane Eyre. Erm... 

[talk together]

Anne:	... Victorian literature.

Sue:	I am more excited about it now. I don't want to say I would never...

?:	You [13.53]

Sue:	It's revived my excitement shall we say.  

I:	That’s good.  

Liz:	That book we were reading last, the one last week I actually found it in a cheapo bookstore in New Brighton, I picked it up there.

I:	Great. That's excellent. Yes.  247.  Phases of love. So I will read Angie's little introduction here at the beginning. It says Jane an unloved orphan grew up in Lowood Institution, a charity boarding school where she survived hardship and cruelty. Now she has come to Thornfield Hall as a governess to Adele the young ward of Mr Rochester.  Rochester's wife is mad and unknown to Jane is living locked away in the attic of the house, under the care of an unreliable servant Grace Pool.  Despite her plain appearance and modest position, Rochester is intrigued by Jane, and she in turn finds herself becoming more and more drawn to him.  Ok, so that's the rough background.

	And was Mr Rochester now ugly in my eyes.  No, reader, gratitude and many associations all pleasurable and genial made his face the object I best liked to see. His presence in a room was more cheering than a brightest fire, yet I had not forgotten his faults. Indeed I could not for he brought them frequently before me.

((laughs))

	He was proud, sardonic, harsh to inferiority of every description. In my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others. He was moody too, unaccountably so.  I more than once when sent for to read to him, found him sitting in his library alone with his head bent forward on his folded arms, and when he looked up a morose almost a malignant scowl blackened his features. But I believed that his moodiness, his harshness and his former faults of morality, I say former for now he seemed corrected of them, had their source in some cruel loss of... cross of fate.  I believed he was naturally a man of better tendencies, higher principles and purer tastes, than such as circumstances had developed.  Education instilled, or destiny encouraged.  I thought there were excellent materials in him, though for the present they hung together somewhat spoiled and tangled.  I cannot deny that I grieved for his grief whatever that was and would have given much to assuage it. 

	 I will stop there for a minute while I just get you to get the measure of Jane. So here she is I can't remember how old she is but she is, I don't think she is 20. 

Sue:	I though she was about 18.

I:	Yes, so...

Sue:	I don't know why I thought that.

I:	and quite a young teenager in that she, you know she has just been very removed from the world so this is her first experience really outside of Lowood and so on and yet when you read her thoughts erm... she seems very mature doesn't she?

Sue:	Yes. I wish I hadn't read it sometimes so I could read it fresh because I feel as though I am hearing the author and, 

I:	That is not quite the same as Jane?

Sue:	No.  

I:	Yes that is interesting but in a way the book is told if you hear it in... like all this is Jane's voice and I, it is as if it is told from the end of the story isn't it, so maybe the story is ended and now she is 45 and writing it down.

Sue:	Oh yes 

I:	and you wonder how much back looking there might be. We are in the past tense in all of this aren't we, and was Mr Rochester now ugly in my eyes. Erm...

Anne:	I like that part where it says in my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others. Because when you sort of erm... when you are in sort of a relationship it's different, their relationship with you and you with them is different from theirs with everybody else and I think that put it very succinctly that sort of...

I:	But what about that feeling that somebody who was kind to you, isn't kind to other people?

Gerry:	That reminds me of what Frank was saying about that teacher who was very, very unpleasant, but when he made these comments and her family were there and they were heartbroken, so she might have been a lovely kind person, granny to those young people but to Frank and the children that she taught it was totally different.

I:	Yes, yes and that surely would worry you about a person wouldn't it? 

Gerry:	Hmm

I:	and I just wonder she seems really glad of him she says, his face was the object I best liked to see. Now if you cast your minds around, to a moment when you felt like that about somebody... 

Gerry:	There is a connection isn't there, a strong connection.

I:	A very strong connection and yet she seems willing to, in my secret soul, how secret did she know herself, did she know in consciousness that his great kindness to me was balanced by not just severity but unjust severity to many others. Bit worrying? Possibly.

Anne:	And also erm... I thought it was quite amusing when it said, yet I had not forgotten his faults indeed I could not because he brought them ((laughs)) frequently before me ((laughs)). She is not blinded is she?

I:	No but she is very, very erm... glad of him, or more than that.  

Sue:	She [20.51] She has had a lot of people be very unkind to her hasn't she, as it says. In the school there was the head teacher who was kind to her and there was a friend, but there was nobody else was there who was kind.

I:	No in fact positively unkind and her aunt and so on.  

Anne:	Yes but you don't get a feeling of her being needy or anything like that, she seems very contained and... and mature as you said and sort of erm... after her experiences you would think she would have all kinds of whatever but she doesn't she is, you know how erm... it just makes me think of Virginia Woolf is it To the Lighthouse where the mother is... she is... I can't... she is her own person I think and... and I suppose we have got people they are their own person as well as being, she is her own person as well.  And when you look at them you sort of admire them because they are, whatever they talk about at home or anything they seem you know erm... completely together.

I:	I think that is a good thing to keep in mind for her as we read on. 

[talk together]

Liz:	You are talking about her past experiences of a boarding school and people being unkind and what not, but sometimes that can like force someone into maturing and you know they have to learn fast and mature.

I:	Yes and maybe also to control their feelings in those very hard situations, maybe but we will read on and see what happens.

Anne:	Also she sort of, she describes him as excellent materials in him as if, like you got the croquet things it was something she was going to work on ((laughs)).

Sue:	She got the pattern right. 

Anne:	Yes.

I:	Now I should tell you that long ago I read this book in a reading group when I was first starting with The Reader Organisation and it was a group a bit like this, it was nearly all women I think there were two blokes in it and about 7 women and when we read this book Jane Eyre over a long period of time it must have been sort of 10 months or something like that, and when we got to the end of the book there was a guy in the group called Elon and his job had been erm... he was a pub manager, a bar manager retired, it was the first book he had ever read and erm... when we finished the book he sort of closed it like this and he said, well I can honestly say I have learnt more about women by reading this book with you lot than I have in 40 years of marriage.  

((laughs))

Gerry:	that's a testament isn't it.  

I:	Imagine Penguin Classics with that on the back.  They would fly off the shelf, it's all in here. But it was, it was hearing all these ladies discuss everything about... 

Gerry:	[24.09] could be dangerous that.

Anne:	there is a hint of Heathcliffe I think, you know her sister because an almost malignant scowl blackened his features, there is just that hint there, because they taught(?) together didn't they?

I:	He could be dangerous yes.  Yes he could. Ok but we finished the paragraph with I cannot deny that I grieved for his grief whatever that was and would have given much to assuage it.  If love is a scale from 1 to 10, at this stage where, what number would you like to put Jane at in relation to Mr Rochester? Rough guess just on the basis of that.

Liz:	7,

I:	Quite high then quite high.  

Sue:	I would have said lower but I am just trying to think how low. 

I:	High?

Gerry:	about 7 or 8 yes.

Liz:	I think she knows what he is like but she can't help herself in a sense.

Sue:	Her reason is still in command at the moment though isn't it? Go on give it a 6.

Liz:	6.5 ((laughs))

I:	I see Mike you are quiet on this, you are not guessing.  

Mike:	I would say a bit more indifferent maybe.

I:	Yes, yes more than we think.

Mike:	yes I think so yes.

I:	Do you feel that because she does like see his bad things as well as his, so moodiness, harshness, former faults of morality, the word Anne picked out malignant, morose she is seeing all that.

Mike:	Not great is it ((laughs))

I:	It's not great. Ok. There is hope here because she sees all that but she also doesn't seem to be very bothered.  Erm... and she thinks she can work on him. I believed he was naturally a man of better tendencies, higher principles and purer tastes. Right so...

	Though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid down in bed, I could not sleep for thinking of his look when he paused in the avenue and told how his destiny had risen up before him and dared him to be happy at Thornfield.  Why not, I asked myself, what alienates him from the house, will he leave it again soon.  Mrs Fairfax, that's the housekeeper, said he seldom stayed her longer than a fortnight at a time, and he has now been resident 8 weeks.  If he does go the change will be doleful. Suppose he should be absent spring, summer and autumn how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem. I hardly know whether I had slept or not after this musing, at any rate I started wide awake on hearing a vague murmur peculiar and lugubrious, which sounded I thought just above me. Lugubrious meaning something like doleful, sad, erm... really down.  So, a vague murmur. I will and do one for you... 

((laughs))

	((makes noise))

Anne:	That wasn't vague ((laughs)).

I:	No perhaps a bit quieter than that.

((laugh))

	Just hear a little bit of that through the floor. I wish I had kept my candle burning the night was drearily dark, my spirits were depressed. I rose and sat up in bed listening the sound was hushed.  I tried again to sleep but my heart beat anxiously, my inward tranquillity was broken the clock far down in the hall struck 2, just then it seemed my chamber door was touched as if fingers had swept the panels in a groping way along the dark gallery outside. I said who is there? Nothing answered I was chilled with fear.  All at once I remembered that it might be Pilot, who is the dog, who went a kitchen door chanced to be left often, not unfrequently found his way up to the threshold of Mr Rochester's chamber. I had seen him lying there myself in the mornings. The idea calmed me somewhat I lay down.   Silence composes the nerves and then as now an unbroken hush now reined again through the whole house. I began to feel the return of slumber.  But it was not fated that I should sleep that night, the dream had scarcely approached my ear, when it fled affrighted, scared by a marrow freezing incident enough, this was a demoniac laugh, low suppressed and deep, uttered as it seemed at the very keyhole of my chamber door. The head of my bed was near the door and I thought at first the goblin laugher stood at my bedside, or rather crouched by my pillow but I rose, looked round and could see nothing.  While as I still gazed the unnatural sounds reiterated and I knew it came from behind the panels. My first impulse was to rise and fasten the bolt, my next again to cry out who is there.  Something gurgled and moaned. Ere long steps retreated up the gallery towards the third story staircase, a door had lately been made to shut in that staircase I heard it open and close, and all was still. Was it Grace Pool and is she possessed with the devil I... thought I.  Impossible now to remain any longer by  myself I must go to Mrs Fairfax, I hurried on my frock and a shawl, I withdrew the bolt and opened the door with a trembling hand, there was a candle burning just outside and on the matting in the gallery I was surprised at this circumstance, but still more I was amazed to perceive the air quite dim as if filled with smoke and while looking to the right hand and left to find where these blue wreaths issued I became further aware of a strong smell of burning. Something creaked it was a door ajar and that door was Mr Rochester's and the smoke rushed in a cloud from thence. I thought no more of Mrs Fairfax, I thought no more of Grace Pool, or the laugh in an instant, I was within the chamber tongues of flame darted round the bed, the curtains were on fire, in the midst of blaze and vapour Mr Rochester lay stretched motionless in deep sleep. Wake, wake, I cried, I shook him but he only murmured and turned, the smoke had stupefied him. Not a moment could be lost, the very sheets were kindling, I rushed to his basin and ewer, fortunately one was wide and the other deep and both were filled with water, I heaved them up deluged the bed and it's occupant, went back to my own room, brought my own water jug baptised the couch afresh and by God's aid succeeded in extinguishing the flames which were devouring it.  The hiss of the quenched element, the breakage of the pitcher which I flung from my hand when I had emptied it, and above all the splash of the shower bath I had liberally bestowed roused Mr Rochester at last. Though it was now dark I knew he was awake because I heard him fulminating strange anathemas at finding himself lying in a pool of water. Is there a flood he cried,  no sir I answered but there has been a fire, get up, do you are quenched now I will fetch you a candle. In the names of all the elves in Christendom is that Jane Eyre he demanded, what have you done with me witch, sorceress who is in the room beside you?  Have you plotted to drown me.  I will fetch you a candle sir, and in heaven's name get up, somebody has plotted something you cannot too soon find out who and what it is. There I am up now, at your peril you fetch a candle yet, wait 2 minutes till I get some dry garments, if any dry there be. Yes. Here is my dressing gown now run.  I did run, I brought the candle which still remained in the gallery, he took it from my hand, held it up and surveyed the bed all blackened and scorched, the sheets drenched, the carpet ran swimming in water, what is it and who did it he asked.  

	Stop there for a minute. The adventure. That was good wasn't it?

Anne:	((laughs))

Sue:	I love the language I really love the language but she does take quite a long time to say there is a fire ((laughs)). But it's beautifully done isn't it. 

I:	I don't know if anybody has ever had a fire in their house but I have. 

Gerry:	Ooh...

I:	when I was a kid our house went on fire and erm... I woke up in the middle of the night exactly like that sort of thinking it's too dark even though it's dark.  And when you put the landing light on like still couldn't see properly.

Gerry:	Was it night?

I:	Yes it was the middle of the night. It was really... and that feeling that you can't work out what is going on.

Gerry:	Because you don't want the smoke to be there and you think you are still half asleep.

I:	Yes that's right yes, and you don't... and then you think no it is, it is smoke that is why I can't... it was very, very, very weird.

Gerry:	Where was the fire?

I:	We lived in a pub by the Anglican Cathedral back of there and so there was the pub then the kind of living room and then the bedrooms it was very high up in those old regency buildings, the firemen had to get us out through the top window. Carry us down a ladder.  It was terrifying.

Gerry:	So the fire was in the pub was it?

I:	It was in, yes it was on the staircase so couldn't get out.  

Gerry:	Did you know how it had started?

I:	Cigarette.  

Gerry:	So dangerous, because didn't a football stadium burn down somewhere, somebody it was all rubbish underneath and it was somebody just discarded...

I:	Was it Nottingham?

Anne:	Was it Bradford...

Gerry:	I think it was something like Bradford. Absolute tragedy.  

I:	so but back to her yes.  What were you going to say Liz?

Liz:	I was just going to say because you mentioned about a football stadium because the [35.01] club I go to, the stand is wooden and apparently health and safety officer was like wood, it is the best ground locally stop moaning. 

I:	Yes well keep it. So that disorientation then erm...  but first of all what struck me when erm.. that strange thing began to happen, in fact should we go back right to erm... when she was lying down in bed at the beginning of it which is on page 248 erm... when she is wondering about why he can't be happy there and erm... Mrs Fairfax says he seldom stays longer than a fortnight but he has been here 8 weeks.  

Gerry:	Something is keeping him there.

I:	Hmm

Sue:	Or someone.

I:	Yes something or someone.  

Sue:	She remembers him talking when she says his destiny has risen up before him wasn't that when he was riding back and she was on her way there.

I:	Yes she rose up certainly didn't she, she sort of startled his horse, she was walking along.

Sue:	Did he fall?

I:	Think he did yes something like that yes, 

Sue:	and he called her an elf or something then didn't he, or a fairy or something. 

Anne:	That kind of is, that sort of thing is referred to a few times you know, the elves and there was something else earlier on which I noted but I am not quite sure where it was now where that kind of erm... 

I:	Almost supernatural?

Anne:	Supernatural kind of fairy kind of thing is referred to and erm... 

I:	Just stay with the thought for a minute of where she finishes at the bottom of 248, if he does go the change will be doleful suppose he should be absent spring, summer and autumn how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem. Going back to this scale...

Liz:	I told you 7, I told you 7. I did tell you.

Sue:	She is almost 10 here.   It has spiked rapidly.

I:	Mike now look if a girl was really thinking this, suppose he should go how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem, you have got to give her the benefit of the doubt that she is probably in love with him now I think. 

Mike:	Hmm, maybe yes.

Gerry:	Men sort of looking for something a bit more tangible than that.  If they think somebody is in love with them maybe they don't expect women to hide their feelings, so they are looking for [37.24] Yes sighing and baking cakes or you know what I mean.

Sue:	Knitting for them. 

Gerry:	Sewing fine waistcoat for them.  ((laughs)).

I:	We don't know what kind of sighing we would want. He is open minded about it.

Anne:	I get the impression that you know how they talk about sort of in love, and love which again is sort of for a husband or a partner erm... I get the feeling she is the latter, it's much deeper than erm... lust or something like that, or infatuation you feel that it is something solid you know that she...

I:	Where do you think you are getting that feeling from Anne?

Anne:	Well it just... it is just I think it's probably sort of her, when she is thinking about it and the confidence that she has and also the way that she deals with it. It's... it's more than just erm... you know falling in love, hoping he will you know, fall for her, there is something much more fundamental and...

I:	I like your word confidence I think that's, I would like to keep that in the back of my head I think that's good. 

Liz:	[38.46] ((laughs))

I:	I have seen it, I note it.  

Liz:	What was I going to say talking about love here but like there is different types of love and there is you know she may just be very, very you know caring type of love, you know or wants what is best for him and what not and concerned love not just love between you know partner...

I:	I would still say imagine the feeling of if that person isn't there summer will be no good, that is what she is really saying. 

Gerry:	And also when you can't sleep.  That shows the depth that you can't sleep.

Sue:	I think the word doleful, just that one word.

I:	and it's almost that being depressed if he goes away.

Sue:	Does that literally mean full of sorrow, dole...

I:	hmm

Anne:	And I also think because she sort of chooses the word, the, should he be absent spring summer and autumn I mean those, I mean winter, but spring summer and autumn are the kinds of the most exciting part of the years, and that is for her is just going to be empty.

I:	Yes well I am pushing it up from 7 to 8 or 9.

Gerry:	Definitely

I:	I just think this is quite intense. 

Mike:	I think I was wrong there to say indifferent but erm... 

Sue:	Cautious maybe.

Mike:	She is a woman isn't she?

((all laugh))

Anne:	What do you think about Mr Rochester's response?

I:	Ok well we will come on to that, we will come onto that. I am very sorry that there is so many of us and only one of you and I just hope you are not feeling too under the spot light Mike that is all I would say. I will look away from you. Ok so she says she hardly knew whether she had slept or not after and then she heard the noise, erm... the night was really dark, my spirits were depressed, I rose and sat up in the bed listening the sound was hushed.  Tried to sleep again, so top of 249, erm... and then she hears, feels that feeling as if fingers had touched the door, just this noise... 

Anne:	and also the word the sound was hushed, you know that is... I mean later we know that there is somebody looking after so it wasn't just the sound but somebody hushed it sort of said quiet or something. 

Sue:	And was that action deliberate because if the person is carrying the candle they don't need to touch the wood. It says groping implying that you are trying to find your way in the dark but she has got a candle. 

I:	Yes, so could it be somebody who is even trying to frighten her?  

Anne:	And then I like the choose of the word marrow freezing incident enough, it just makes me think of sort of the medical science at that time and how they believed whatever and it just, just brings into erm... 

I:	where is that I can't see it?

Anne:	Page 249 it's just the end of the second to last paragraph the erm... a dream had scarcely approached my ears, it's the bottom line of the second to last paragraph. It's just, it's just that use of marrow, marrow because you know, just brings into mind of what what was known about medical science and you know...

I:	[talk over] I don't know what they did know about marrow do you?

Anne:	Not really ((laughs))

Sue:	They would have had marrow bones for the dog.  

Liz:	I was going to say also in terms of the language used to actually describe dreams and stuff in that particular language of the time as well it can be hard to actually apply our modern usage.

I:	If you say I was frozen to the marrow, or chilled to the bone or, there is a phrase about marrow isn't there?

Anne:	I think it's chilled to the marrow or something.

I:	So the marrow is like inside your bones isn't it, it is... very deepest of you would be scared stiff.

Liz:	But even now, even nowadays there is loads of terms which are, you don't take them literally, if somebody has a term for it, [43.02] there is a word for it.

I:	Yes can't remember that word but erm... so she is chilled with fear she is scared by marrow freezing incident so she is terrified, but look what she does when she hears the laugh, she hears it in that last paragraph low suppressed and deep, uttered at the very keyhole of my chamber door, near her bed head, near her head so I thought the goblin laughter stood at my bedside, crouched by  my pillow. 

Anne:	See it's that use of word goblin and crouched by my pillow it's so, I know some of the stories of Conon Doyle are sort of weird things from the East or something that are, you know in the peculiarist, weird things and that's what that is like.  

I:	it does feel as if she fears it is something supernatural.  But what she does is... 

Anne:	she gets up.

I:	Yes, or rather crouched by my pillow, but I rose, looked around and could see nothing.  So that is a very, very rational I don't know what you would do if you heard a frightening noise in the night? What would you do?

Sue:	I have been alone in quite a big, my old house and I have actually gone up the stairs with a tennis racket in my hand ((laughs)).

I:	A tennis racket, the old tennis racket routine.

Sue:	Thinking to myself, no went downstairs rather, what am I going to do ((laughs)) if there is somebody down there.

Gerry:	with a tennis racket.

Sue:	But on other occasions I have just clothes over my head.  

Gerry:	It depends on your mood doesn't it yes.

I:	What would you do if you were afraid?

Gerry:	Yes I would probably get up and go and see because I have done that yes, because sometimes our alarm has gone off and I have been by myself, and I have been quite surprised that I have gone down.  

Liz:	I was told that if I am... because I normally live with my parents and I was told by my dad that if I am on my own and if you know if there is something which really freaks me out, you know there is actually a button in their room which sets the alarms off erm... 

I:	And do you think would you do that?

Liz:	I have never...

I:	Needed to 

Liz:	but if you heard some movement downstairs, like there is someone down there, putting the alarms on will scare hopefully. 

I:	So Mike if you heard a noise in the night would you get up and go and have a look or would you just go back to sleep or what?

Mike:	Erm.. I would probably, probably go out and look yes. I think I have done in the past, when I have heard noises, gone to investigate them. Just to erm... 

I:	Just to settle yourself?

Mike:	Yes you know, 

I:	and then there is usually nothing there.   Because I lived you know, not on my own for a very, very long time and sometimes if my husband is away if I hear noises, what you said sometimes I would get up and go and check, check that you know and other times I would just think I will just put the blanket over my head ((laughs)) as if that was just as good as going to check. Isn't that funny... [46.30 talk together] ((laughs))

Anne:	I thought it was interesting the way she said silence composes the nerves because, because it does, then she goes on and an unbroken hush now reigned but that is time that composes, silence, you are sitting you are lying there listening and it's when time has gone on and you haven't heard anything but silence you know everything is, is listening isn't it? Particularly when you have got a dog on the bed that suddenly makes a noise that somebody is around ((laughs)).

I:	So we noticed that her first impulse then, at the most scary moment of thinking there is something right by your pillow, her impulse, unlike mine probably is to get up and have a look, really get up straight away see nothing erm... so she hears still the unnatural sound reiterated and I knew it came from behind the panels, the door panels.

Anne:	and then again you have got that word suppressed, low, suppressed and deep the demoniac  again you have got that, you have got those hints already that there is somebody being looked after or that is sort of suppressed. I mean obviously one can suppress something oneself without being told to but you get that feeling there is somebody you know looking, in charge of somebody to...

I:	I don't feel that. Do you think suppressed is like erm...

Anne:	You have got the hushed 

I:	[talk over] like someone is suppressing you.

Anne:	You have got the feeling that, yes yes. 

Sue:	That's because  she know what happened in it though, that's why I sometimes wish I hadn't read it I could read it fresh for the first time.

Gerry:	It is going to be interesting in the Oscar Pistorius trial because all these emotions are going to come out because that is what happened to him, he heard a noise and he ran, got his gun, shot through the door and he killed his girlfriend.  So this is all these feelings and what you do, this is all going to come out in that trial it's going to be explored so that is going to be interesting.  

I:	Lets hope the barristers have been reading Jane Eyre. Erm... so over the page then, something  gurgled and moaned and ere long steps retreated up the gallery towards the third storey staircase, where we know Grace Pool erm... hangs out.  A door had lately been made to shut in that staircase I heard it open and close, and all was still. Was that Grace Pool and is she possessed with the devil.  So again possessed, devil although it's a bit more human than the words like goblin there still is that feeling that...

Liz:	She is up to something.

I:	There is something weird about it all. 

Gerry:	Something evil going on in that house.

I:	Yes. And maybe that you can't explain rationally though Jane does seem a very rational person in lots of ways.

Sue:	She stops to put her dress on and her shawl. Her dress on and her shawl around her.

I:	and the we get to the fire so erm... erm... 

Liz:	who is Grace Pool again?

I:	She is a servant in the house. 

Liz:	Oh she is the unreliable servant.

I:	Yes and it says unreliable, actually she often seems to be drinking I think. We don't know for a long time what she is, erm... 

Anne:	Then you have got things like the blue wreaths and again there is that, there is that ethereal kind of world I mean it's Yorkshire isn't it and there was a lot of belief in, certainly at that time it was, it wasn't so much... it was taken for granted that you know this was... 

Gerry:	Yes, there were things floating around like sprites.  

Anne:	but then just, I know we have got to work our way through it but just to skimp you get, one the bed all blackened and scorched...

I:	Tell us where it is so we can follow you.

Anne:	The bottom of 251 sort of the last, just towards the bottom of it but not quite at the bottom of it, which is I mean it looks blackened and scorched it is just so uncomfortable I mean you think of a nice luxurious bed and that is just so horrible.

Liz:	It has been on fire hasn't it ((laughs))

Anne:	but you have got this feeling of his masculinity where he, he says you know erm... not to look basically while he got up ((laughs)) and, and you have got that sort of, that masculinity coming in.

Liz:	It may have been dark now because this is when she actually got the candle for him and then he looked.

Anne:	but it's just that again it's that hint of his erm... it's... it's a sexuality kind of thing slightly isn't it really.

I:	Is anybody else feeling that?

Sue:	There is danger in it, when he says at your peril, at your peril you fetch a candle, so you are not going to like what you see or... 

Liz:	Anything might happen. 

Anne:	It's him as a sexual being isn't it, being in bed.  And yet the bed

[talk together]

Liz:	I read it in the sense that his first thought was, was that Jane did it because she was there...

I:	And he says what have you done with me.

Sue:	Yes true.

Liz:	And then he is obviously still thinking that, he doesn't... he has just been woken up and from a smoky type of haze and you know then he is still being rather shouty and not to actually say that I think it's a case of he is still trying to get a picture of what is going on.

Anne:	Wake up and know what is happening.

Liz:	Smoke does funny things to you.

I:	Lets just read from wake, wake would somebody else?

Sue:	Hmm

I:	Bottom of 250 wake, wake.

Sue:	Is that where we are starting?  Sorry...  wake, wake I cried.  I shook him but he only  murmured and turned, the smoke had stupefied him. Not a moment could be lost the very sheets were kindling I rushed to his basin and ewer, fortunately one was wide and the other deep and both were filled with water, I heaved them up deluged the bed and the document... occupant sorry, flew back to my own room, brought my own water jug, baptised the couch afresh and by God's aid succeeded in extinguishing the flames which were devouring it. The hiss of the quenched element, the breakage of a picture which I flung from my hand when I had emptied it and above all the splash of the shower bath I had liberally bestowed roused Mr Rochester at last. Though it was now dark I knew he was awake because I heard him fulminating strange anathemas at finding himself lying in a pool of water. Is there a flood he cried, no sir I answered but there has been a fire. Get up do, you are quenched now I will fetch you a candle. In the name of all the elves in Christendom is that Jane Eyre he demanded, what have you done with me witch, sorceress who is in the room besides you have you plotted to drown me.  I will fetch you a candle sir, and in heaven's name get up. Somebody has plotted something you cannot come too soon, find out who and what it is.  There, I am up now but at your peril you fetch a candle yet. Wait two minutes until I get into some dry garments if any dry there be, yes. Here is my dressing gown now run. 

I:	Ok stop there then for a minute so erm... 

Anne:	What I notice is the lack of trust where what have you done, who is in the room beside you, there is a lack of trust there.  

Liz:	I wonder whether you know when she first heard the noises, I think perhaps that was on purpose to get her up to actually set her up and get her...

I:	Get her to be blamed even?

Liz:	Involved so that it will hide everything else that had been going on. 

I:	He knows...

Sue:	He knows the person most likely to do him any harm in that place but she doesn't.  And yet is his first instinct to blame Jane? Is that in the confusion when you wake up and you don't expect to be in that situation.

I:	How dangerous do you think elves are? Elves?

Anne:	I don't think they are, they are not goblins.

I:	Yes, yes

Sue:	It depends what kind of they are.

Gerry:	The play tricks don't they elves.

I:	Yes they might be mischievous or naughtily playful like you wouldn't be thinking erm... they are dangerous but then witch sorceress, what have you done with me witch, sorceress.  Is it, is he really, does he fear her, really fear that some sort of power?

Liz:	Well I think he actually knows something has happened and she is the one there ((laughs)) so...

Anne:	but then it's who is in the room beside you, have you plotted

I:	[talk over] beside you.

Anne:	You know there is that, there is as I said that, there is a...

I:	Lack of trust.

Gerry:	He probably thinks his wife is locked upstairs and then she probably... because of the arrive, the doors being left unlocked and then but he might think Jane is in cahoots with her. So...

Anne:	also probably going on from there as well if you think about it because the woman upstairs is his wife, and if he is thinking of Jane in a romantic way, then it is almost as if women erm... who he might care for might, might be...

I:	Might be dangerous

Anne:	Might be dangerous.

Sue:	Because he has been taken in before.

Gerry:	That's a good point Anne yes.

Sue:	He believes he has been fooled into that first marriage does he?

Gerry:	Oh, ok.

I:	So plotting etc, erm... she is so active in this I just think it's an amazing sort of wonderful, turnaround of you know princess saves prince.

Sue:	She takes charge she doesn't shout for people to come and help her does she?

I:	No she is not panicking or she just practically, practically getting on with putting the fire out.  Erm... 

Anne:	and yet you have got her feeling of her youth when he says now run, you have got that feeling of her being  a girl.

I:	Yes. Someone else carry on from there?

Anne:	Can I? 

	I did run I bought the candle which still remained in the gallery, he took it from my hand, held it up and surveyed the bed, all blackened and scorched, the sheets drenched, the carpet around swimming in water. What is it, and who did it he asked? I briefly related to him what had transpired the strange laugh I had heard in the gallery, the step ascending to the third storey, the smoke the smell of fire which had conducted me to this room, in what state I found matters there, and how I dele... deluged him with all the water I could lay my hands on. He listened very gravely. His face as I went on expressed more concern than astonishment, he did not immediately speak when I concluded.  Shall I call Mrs Fairfax I asked. Mrs Fairfax, no what the deuce would you call her for what can she do, let her sleep unmolested.  Then I will fetch Leah and wake John and his wife, not at all just be still. You have a shawl on if you are not warm enough you may take my coat yonder, wrap it about you to sit in the armchair there.  I will put it on. Now place your feet on the stall... on the stool to keep them out of the wet, I am going to leave you for a few minutes I shall take the candle remain where you are until I return, be as still as a mouse  I must pay a visit to the second storey, don't move remember or call anyone. He went. I watched the light withdraw. He passed up the gallery very softly unclosed the staircase door with as little noise as possible, shut it after him, and the last ray vanished. I was left in total darkness, I listened for some noise but heard nothing a very long time elapsed I grew weary, I was cold in spite of the cloak and then I did not see the use of staying as I was not to rouse the house. I was on the point of risking Mr Rochester's displeasure by disobeying his orders when the light once more gleamed dimly on the gallery wall and I heard his unshod feet tread the matting. I hope it is he she thought, thought I and not something worse.  He re-entered pale and very gloomy.  I found it all out he said settling his candle down on the wash stand, it is as I thought. How sir? He made no reply but stood with his arms folded looking on the ground. At the end of a few minutes he enquired in rather a peculiar term, I forgot whether you saw anything when you opened your chamber door. No sir only the candlestick on the ground. But you heard an odd laugh, you have heard that laugh before I should think or something like it. Yes sir there is a woman who serves here called Grace Pool she laughs in that way, she is a singular person. Just so, Grace Pool you have guessed it she is as you say singular very. Well I shall reflect on the subject meanwhile I am glad you are the only person beside myself acquainted with the precise de... details of tonight's incident, you are now talking fool, say nothing about it. I will account for this state of affairs, pointing to the bed, and now return to your own room. I shall do very well on the sofa in the library for the rest of the night, it is near 4, in 2 hours the servants will be up.  Good night then sir said I departing.  He seemed surprised, very inconsistently so as he had just told me to go, what he explained are you quitting me already and in that way.  You said I might go sir, but not without taking leave, not without a word of two of acknowledgement of good will, not in short in that brief dry fashion why you saved my life.  Snatching me from a horrible excruciating death, and you walk past me as if we were mutual bo... mutual strangers, at least shake hands.  He held out his hand, I gave him mine he took it first in one, and then in both his own, you saved my life I have pleasure in owning you so immense a debt, I cannot say more. Nothing else that has been would have been intolerable, would have been tolerable to me in the character creditor for such an obligation but you, it is different. I feel your benefit is no burden. Sorry I am getting a bit confused. I feel your benefits no burden Jane. 

I:	Lets stop for a minute.

Anne:	Sorry about that

I:	That was great, very nice, lovely. But a lot has happened hasn't it.  So, 

Liz:	so where did he go when he left the room?

I:	He went upstairs.

Liz:	where his wife is?

I:	So his wife is up there and Grace Pool is really looking after her but Jane doesn't know that. She only knows, she doesn't know there is a wife she only knows Grace Pool. So he is lying to her.  

Gerry:	Or he is not telling her the full picture.

I:	No. And that when he tries... when it said erm... at the top of 253, he made no reply but stood with his arms folded looking on the ground at the end of a few minutes he enquired in a rather peculiar tone, I forget whether you said you saw anything when you opened your chamber door. So, 

Anne:	The secret isn't it, there is that secret hidden.

I:	and if she had seen, so depending on what she now says, he will work out what to tell her.

Sue:	It's a very sly way of telling her a lie isn't it?

Gerry:	But he can't tell her the truth can he?

Sue:	No

I:	Well he doesn't seem able to.

Gerry:	I have got my wife locked upstairs ((laughs)).  

Anne:	and yet at the same time as that he also, she is the only person beside himself that knows what has happened so, part of him is sharing this with her and another part is not telling her what everybody else already knows so, she is included and excluded at the same time.  

I:	Yes she is. That's a funny feeling isn't it that, there is obviously a deep closeness between them even before this really, completely perhaps unacknowledged. But now she has just saved his life and there is a curious intimacy to that you know.

Anne:	for him, not so much for her.

Liz:	if you wake up and your bed had been on fire and someone has put it out for you and they have saved your life you are going to be grateful ((laughs)).  

Sue:	It took him a while still.

Liz:	but once you have got things, you know once you have woken up properly and started to get the picture, the bigger picture of the story you have got to be thinking [01.04.57] because he probably wouldn't have died of, you know died of smoke inhalation.

I:	I am thinking back to Miss Havisham and thinking about her erm... saying to Estella, play cards with him and she on the one hand she is in some relation real to Pip and in another relation completely unreal or dishonest. Erm... she knows what she wants she wants Estella, well you can break his heart, she said didn't she. She doesn't say to Pip I have brought you here to fall in love with this girl. Erm... it is a funny relation where there is two strands of reality or something, one which is true and quite powerful, and another one which is false and seems at the moment equally powerful.  

Anne:	It is interesting that you get the feeling this hasn't happened before. I mean this, the wife has been upstairs for a long time and yet now it is happening and so it is, like I know she is sort of insane but it's almost like the jealous wife sort of now his feelings are going elsewhere, I know that isn't the case but it's almost you could look at it in that way that this is her response. I know it isn't, not even in the story but ...

I:	It's a possible...

Anne:	yes

I:	Way of thinking about it. I was thinking also about the symbolism of his bed being on fire, you know and whether you wanted to just let that be in your mind for a moment.

Anne:	[01.06.38]

Liz:	I was going to say if someone wanted to kill you then if you are asleep the easiest thing is to set fire to whatever you are lying on, fire that's you know...

Gerry:	but she didn't do a very good job because she should have hit him over the head first because there was always a chance he would wake up. 

[talk over]

I:	[talk over] to be knocked out yes, yes. 

Sue:	I am interested in the word, I am just looking for it now, when Grace is throwing all the water on it she uses the word baptism and what happens when you have a baptism you are supposed to be a new being.

I:	I didn't notice that.

Sue:	Comes out in the baptism doesn't it.

Anne:	Yes is that from the earlier part...

Sue:	Yes its way back.  

Anne:	It's on the bottom of 250 the second... the second to bottom line 250.

Gerry:	Yes it suggests change doesn't it...

I:	Baptise the couch afresh.

Anne:	It isn't just baptise the couch it's baptise the couch afresh.

Gerry:	Oh yes, yes.  

I:	Afresh means for the second time. I heaved them up, deluged the bed and the occupant, flew back to my... so deluge is one thing but the second time that action throwing water on the couch it is baptised the couch afresh.  Just thinking of them as biblical words as well, thinking of the deluge and the flood and baptism erm...

Sue:	Like a cleansing?

I:	Yes, 

Anne:	and also as you said, I mean there is a baptism of fire isn't there as well as a baptism of water and you are supposed to be reborn after fire, as well it's supposed to burn away all... 

I:	Enormously symbolic then.  We will just let those thoughts whirl round in our mind and not settle them down into anything but they are there, the language is there isn't it, saying all those things. Erm... let's go back to Anne's thought about him erm... saying erm... don't, as it were don't put the light on yet, when he says there I am up now, this is on page 251 but at your peril you fetch a candle yet, wait 2 minutes until I get into some dry garments.

Liz:	Because he has actually... he has already accused her of trying to drown him so, he wants to get into dry garments as if that is going to help ((laughs)).

I:	I don't know I think I am with Anne in he doesn't want her to see him naked. It's that isn't it, don't get a candle, I have got to get out of bed and get some stuff on.  

Gerry:	He is coming to his senses now isn't he?

I:	Yes,  he seems curiously a bit squeamish on his part in a way.  

Sue:	But he is conscious of the attraction isn't he, if he wasn't he wouldn't be bothered about her seeing him that way would he?

Anne:	Oh I think he would

Sue:	Would he I don't know.

I:	would you call it at your peril you might say to somebody do you mind just not putting the light on until I have got my dressing gown on please. 

Anne:	but at your peril is...

Liz:	If it's a certain erm... you know seeing someone like that is a bit erm... what is the term, like, like lowering of them I can't think the... 

I:	yes so can't

[talk together]

Gerry:	can't see the Master.

I:	Social [01.09.59] if you have got no clothes on. 

Liz:	Yes and if there is that certain, because he is like the man of the house in  a sense and he doesn't want to be...

I:	be seen as a vulnerable person maybe.

Liz:	You know it, it erm... the word I am trying to think of isn't...

I:	It looks like Sue is thinking of something else...

Sue:	I am thinking, I am thinking well she is employed there.

Liz:	And that is a massive...

[talk together]

I:	He is powerful as well. So the person with no clothes on in a room where someone has clothes on, the person with no clothes on as less power...

Gerry:	Vulnerable.

I:	surely that's just would be an accepted.

Anne:	Oh but we have got the... 

Gerry:	I’ve got all my fingers up. 

Anne:	You are all very tame in what you think ((laughs)).

Sue:	I am thinking who is the painter who painted the painting of all the men in clothes and the women with no clothes on? There is, it's a French artist. 

I:	Recent one you mean?

Sue:	No I think it's 19th century yes I think so. Oh can't think who it is but you know that is putting those women in a more than vulnerable position than if they were all naked you know, or a state of undress.

Liz:	I was going to say you could say that about some of the so called music videos nowadays in that sense.

Anne:	But there again she is in, she is in... is she in her nightie?

I:	No she is dressed. She is dressed. She put her clothes on really quickly, she put her dress on and her shawl didn't she?

Sue:	they use the word frock don't they, I knew someone who used to use the word frock if she thought it was something cheap ((laughs)) but that was just her.  Yes frock...

I:	Yes there was a difference between a frock and a dress. 

Sue:	I think it was different then though.

I:	Yes, yes

Anne:	She tended to wear grey kind of thing, that...

I:	Yes she does, doesn't she yes. So going back to his words again, there I am up now but at your peril you fetch a candle yet.  Wait 2 minutes until I get into some dry garments if any dry there be.  Yes here is my dressing gown, now run. Erm... so Anne still thinks that there is a sort of sexual undertone to that, that it's like...

Anne:	I do.

Liz:	I don't think so. 

Anne:	I [01.12.13] ((laughs))

Sue:	I do agree.   Yes, yes. 

I:	So we will just leave that one hanging there for a while and make up our mind as time goes on.

Anne:	You have got a feeling, I don't know you know how he is gloomy, and moody and... there is erm... there is a certain powerful, I don't know whether the word is powerful with black moods, there is a certain amount of, I don't know whether power is the right word but erm... dominance by that, I mean if he was I mean look at the person in Jane Austen in Pride and Prejudice, Mr Bickham who the other one marries...

Sue:	Darcy.

Anne:	Not Darcy the other one, but this idea erm... I mean Darcy if you know it is dark looks and gloomy and there is this, I don't know whether it's supposed to be men are made more, more attractive by this or something, or is it just that when people are moody or are gloomy, they have more it is... 

I:	there is a kind of power.

Anne:	it's a kind of power.

I:	Yes, yes. Yes. Well I don't know I would ask, what do you think about that, is there a power.

Mike:	Less approachable aren't they you know but to be held in you know...

I:	In esteem or,

Mike:	esteem,

I:	awe even

Mike:	yes

Sue:	To be wondered about. 

I:	Yes, yes

Liz:	I think there is like a seriousness which for example you know traditionally the men have dealt with the business side of things and needed a bit of seriousness type of you know which is a different, different being to like a lady would need to be in that you know, they are totally different.

I:	It is still the case isn't it that, that women are more, on the whole chatty than guys?

Anne:	How would this have been if Jane had been the moody one, how different the story would have been he wouldn't have fallen for her at all would he? You know...

I:	that's an interesting experiment isn't it?

Anne:	I wonder what we think, if it had been she had been gloomy and moody and I mean, 

I:	in a way she is... she has sort of moods but they are not gloomy, let us carry on looking at it, keep going back.

Liz:	I was going to say I think there was a difference between men and women in that you know, naturally in that sense that you know how I mean I just think of my own parents and their different, different manners in a sense you know erm... and I wouldn't swap them round at all.

I:	Yes but would you say that your father is sort of speaking less or?

Liz:	sometimes I don't think that's the case ((laughs)). No but for example like I mean for example when I go to the hospital I like to take my dad just because if I take my mum the doctor compares me and my mum, for him to see my  mum's [01.15.33] and them compares and contrasts and I would rather take my dad who is a lot more, he can be, I mean they are both concerned in their own little ways and act totally differently but what I don't want is for doctors to start making because I know what my parents are like, they don't ((laughs)).

I:	Sue go on...

Sue:	I have just picked up on something,  here he says you are no talking fool. So already he is separating her from...

I:	Others.

Sue:	Other types of women if you like.

Liz:	I suppose he doesn't want, he doesn't want it gossiped around.

I:	He doesn't want anyone to know. 

Liz:	what has happened.

Anne:	but if, if we say that a man is a man of business, a man of the world.  And you know the affairs if he is has got an estate he has to manage, if he is governed by his emotions that he is moody and whatever, that can lead to wrong decision making can't it, because you know, it... you know it's not clear thinking continually.

I:	What we have seen in Jane is, great rationality. She is sensible, very sensible.  And what are we seeing in him is almost panic stations of what has happened, who are you, who knows, let me lie to you.

Liz:	I think that... because I think that's... because he is just being like nearly overcome by smoke, I am sorry but I am sticking up for him in that sense.  If anyone was engulfed in smoke...

I:	Yes they would...

Liz:	It would take a lot longer to wake up.

I:	Yes.

Sue:	So is this life he has built for himself here, because is he about twice as old as her if not more?

I:	Yes he is.

Sue:	He has built this life but it's not as solid as he... does he think it's solid. It doesn't take much to bring it all crashing down around him again.

Gerry:	It's a lot of effort to keep it all under control isn't it, a huge amount of effort to control that situation, 24/7.

Liz:	Is that why he keeps on going? ((laughs)).

I:	Ok let's just look at what he says then towards the end on the top of 254, erm... it's very surprising when he, when he says erm... and now return to your room, oh sorry this is bottom of 253, I will do very well on the sofa for the rest of the night, good night then sir said I departing, he seemed surprised, very inconsistently so. Again utterly as it were rational on her part. And if you had just saved someone from a fire or any sort of situation, don't you think isn't that a bit too rational that you might also be... I know we hug a lot more these days than people used to in the 19th century but don't you think you would want to at least as he says shake hands. But she is just quite ready to leave the room.

Liz:	she probably doesn't because obviously, because he has employed her, so you don't... in that.. if you rescue your employer you will be a bit what is acceptable here.

I:	Hmm. She is not even that is she, it's just erm... it is nearly 4 in 2 hours the servants will be up good night then sir, said I departing.  

Sue:	It seems like a natural ending.

Liz:	she probably thought that that is the most suitable in that relationship.

I:	Just to go.

Anne:	I wonder whether it's points at an amount of... a certain amount, as you described not totally maybe, not totally normal for her either in the fact that she is maybe erm... a little bit too, as you said, and that isn't necessarily normal, in itself so maybe she is more damaged by her past events than we realise.

I:	Than we realise maybe. But, Mike what do you think if you had saved someone's life, do you think, say you save someone from walking in front of a bus or, or something as you part from them surely you would want to do some... I don't know wouldn't you, 

Mike:	Yes...

I:	You would pat them on the back, 

Mike:	Some sort of gesture wouldn't you?

I:	Some gesture surely. You would feel...

Mike:	It depends how cold they are. It depends on the person how cold they are and how...

I:	Yes so they are giving you, they might like the person you saved or the saviour do you mean?

Mike:	the person who has been saved. Depends how...

I:	Yes so if you knew they didn't want you to touch them you would know not to.

Liz:	It sounds that he is a bit like, you know in terms... because it said earlier that, he can be very erm... he can be very severe to people and that can be...  you know his mannerism and you know, and sometimes it may be better off to let him lead the way, alright I will be alright on the couch...

Anne:	What is amazing nobody has a drink of tea or anything, all this fire and smoke and...

Sue:	Strong hot cup of tea.

Anne:	Yes ((laughs)).

Sue:	I am interested in the use of the term might. I am thinking...

I:	Share where?

Sue:	She says you said I might go sir, what else could she have used there, you said I could go, you said I should go. It's leaving her with a choice.

I:	That is like a sentence of somebody who is in the position almost of a servant, you said I might go sir, or an... that is an employee's remark isn't it.  You wouldn't say that to your brother.

Gerry:	No

I:	Or even if you had said alright, it's ok you can go, it is a remark as you are saying to something almost about power or hierarchy or something, it is very formal, very formal. And I think slightly oddly formal given what has just happened.  

Liz:	I am sorry but it's still the employer/ employee type of...

I:	Ok certainly in her mind, ok.  

Liz:	 ... relationship that's in my mind and I am sticking with it ((laughs)).

I:	Fine, fine. But he says but not without taking leave, not without a word or two of acknowledgement and good will. Not in short in that brief dry fashion, why you have saved my life.  Snatched me from a horrible and excruciating death, and you walk past me as if we were mutual strangers.  At least shake hands.

Gerry:	But she did ask him what happened and then he makes no reply so that might have put her off then.

I:	Yes so she might be anyway responding to something...

Gerry:	He has come back and he said he knows what has happened and then she says how sir, and then it says he made no reply and he just stood with his arms folded, so I think that might have changed the atmosphere a little bit then.

I:	right when she is almost suspicious of his silence and then we know he lies to her.  Now she doesn't know he is lying but does she feel.

Sue:	Sense it.

I:	yes sense it.  Maybe.  

Liz:	I mean I think because it's a... because he is in a position where a) he is having to have to wake up fast, and b) someone has just tried to kill him, so he is having to act, so probably a lot of things going on his head... in his head, thinking yes so you know to actually, to actually think and act  erm... consistently.

Gerry:	Because the whole house could have burnt down with everybody in it. 

Liz:	I know I am sort of sticking up for him but ((laughs))

I:	It's fine, it's fine. But now he is turning his attention to her now, it's all over and in a sense some calm is restored so you have saved my life, I have a pleasure in owing you so immense a debt, I cannot say more. Nothing else that has being would have been tolerable to me in the character of creditor for such an obligation. But you, it is different I feel your benefits no burden Jane. So, can somebody try and put that into other words.

Liz:	What in English? ((laughs))

I:	Yes. Sue you were going to...

Sue:	I feel it's bridging the gap between them and it's raising her... if you want to use the word raising to a level of equality with him. Almost like he is granting her that. 

I:	Yes I can owe you a favour. To be in the state of obligation to somebody is... is an odd one, a difficult one sometimes.

Anne:	I was going to comment where it says I feel your benefits no burden, sort of you know a woman is supposed to be so erm... so erm... behaving well and everything and for him I feel your benefits no burden, which means the things about her which are good, he doesn't... maybe sometimes he can feel them a bit... a bit... you know a bit... but, but not with her he feels that who she is, isn't something he can, it's something that he likes and can tolerate while maybe not with other people.

Gerry:	And his wife is a burden.

I:	His wife is a burden. Absolutely a burden yes.

Anne:	But your benefits no burden, it's the word benefits as well. 

I:	That is why I want the translation of everything from nothing else that has been would have been tolerable to me, in the character of creditor for such an obligation I want to understand that before I go onto the burden bit.

Sue:	So if it had been somebody else who had saved me, I couldn't have borne... I couldn't have borne what I would owe them, that is the sense I get from it.

I:	Yes

Gerry:	He is having problems with relationships with other people isn't he, but there is something different about her.

I:	Yes and that may be connected to the thing we noticed at the beginning when she said erm... in my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me, was balanced by an unjust severity to many others. So those difficulties of relationship which are... seem to be characterised by anger and severity etc...

Anne:	and a feeling of burden.

I:	yes, yes, terrible to owe people something. So, what does benefits then mean here, but you it's different, I feel you... I mean I would like a substitute word for benefits. Is it your help, is it what I owe you?

Anne:	You can read it like that I think when you put it, you do the rest of the paragraph and then you go to there I think you can read it like that but I also thought of it as I said which is sort of erm... your attributes your erm... the good things about you I don't... I am not overwhelmed by your... you know but I think probably put, you have to put it in context which is really as you said...

I:	What I owe you, your benefits. But it's a funny, it is almost like poetry isn't it at that point that it is as if that word can go in a number of different ways and if you were reading slowly enough it would feel, both of those or more than both of those.  He paused, gazed at me words almost visible, trembled on his lips but his voice was checked.  Goodnight again sir, there is no debt, benefit, burden obligation in the case. Interesting that she says goodnight again as soon as she realises he is not going to speak some truth to her. He paused, gazed at me with words almost visible trembled on his lips, she really is... seeing something about to happen to him and seeing that he doesn't let it, goodnight again sir, and that's why Liz what you were saying about the hierarchy or the employee it's as if she has to go back to goodnight again sir, he not going to come forward out of himself.

Anne:	And also isn't she, isn't she the ideal person that she doesn't ask anything of him, there is no debt, benefit, burden, obligation I mean she is ideal isn't she you know, I don't know whether sort of a man would feel you know, sort of... you know you can do anything or have anything and you are not complete yes...

I:	I knew he continued you would do me good in some way at some time, I saw it in your eyes when I first beheld you, their expression and smile did not... again he stopped, did not... he proceeded hastily strike delight to my very inmost heart so for nothing, people talk of natural sympathy, I have heard of good genii, genie, but there are grains of truth in the wildest fable. My cherished preserver, good night.

Anne:	My cherished. 

I:	Woo.

Anne:	we are getting to it now.  

Liz:	I still think that he just felt like he actually saw something good in her nature and knew that she would be you know, she would actually act to actually help in whatever way she can and is still indebted because he... because she saved his life I mean...

I:	He saw that at the very first time they met he said erm... I knew you would do me good in some way, 

Liz:	But I don't think there is anything, I mean... I don't... I don't think that was, I don't think that is the love which you are saying.

I:	You still don't think that?

Liz:	No

I:	But what about cherished?

Liz:	but like you would say that about... you would say that about like a cherished daughter or something like that.

Sue:	Preserver though.

I:	But just saying cherished to somebody you weren't, related to or...

Anne:	Strike delight to my inner most heart I mean this is, he has got it hasn't he?

Sue:	I saw it in your eyes, your eyes are meant to be the window of the soul aren't they...

Gerry:	Yes that's true. 

Sue:	So he is almost telling her she is her soul mate I think. 

Liz:	[01.30.45]

I:	[talks over] A strange energy...  strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look.

Liz:	But... but... but...

I:	Don't say anymore buts no. 

Liz:	No but...

Anne:	What did she say...  I am glad I happened to be awake sir ((laughs)). 

Sue:	That pours water on it again doesn't it. ((laughs))

I:	and then I was going, what you will go. I am cold sir. Cold yes and standing in a pool, go then Jane, go... but still he retained my hand, and I could not free it, I bethought myself in it... of an expedient, I think I hear Mrs Fairfax move sir said I. Well leave me he relaxed his fingers and I was gone.  I regained my couch and never thought of sleep.  Till morning dawned I was tossed on a buoyant but unquiet sea where billows of trouble rolled under surges of joy. I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters to a shore, sweet as the hills of Beulah. And now and then a freshening gale wakened by hope, bore my spirit triumphantly towards the Bourne, but I could not reach it.  Even in fancy. Counteracting breeze blew off the land, and continually drove me back. Too feverish to rest, I rose as soon as day dawned.  

Anne:	It's... it's as complicated as the love affairs of today in... because in literature anyway because you know you go so far, he almost... almost and yet... and yet she is, she... she has to have an expedient it's almost as you said she is an employee she has go to, she doesn't feel that she has got an excuse so what you think would be nice and straight forward, he is saying to... she has saved him from a fire, he expresses love, they get married, it's obviously not as simple as that ((laughs)) you know she is not sort of saying oh yes you know, 

I:	Alright go on, go on...

Liz:	I still think that he is... he is still you know because like if someone saves your life, the thoughts and feelings are going to be a whirlwind, and this sounds as if it is a lot more complicated... [01.33.19] and I don't think that, I think he is toyed, muddled up with like whirlwind of not being able to actually put his feelings into place because I mean she just saved his life you know I don't... I don't think that there is...

I:	Are you saying you don't think he is in love with her?

Liz:	No, yes. 

I:	You are saying that?

Liz:	I am saying that I don't think he is. I think he is really... I think he... I think there is feelings there after being saved by her.

I:	But he wanted to put them there before this happened so when he says, she says there's no burden it's alright I have just saved your life that's straight forward it's all over, thank you I will go back to bed now. And he says I knew you would do me good in some way, sometime  I saw it in your eyes when I first beheld you.

Liz:	She is a good person.

I:	You would do me good ok yes. You did not again he stopped... did not he proceeded hastily strike delight to my very inmost heart for nothing.

Liz:	but I was going to say... sorry..

I:	don't believe in love at first sight then?

Sue:	Oh I do, yes. But he doesn't express it at the time, in fact he is quite well not horrible to her but he is brusque isn't he.

I:	when it happened?

Sue:	Yes

Liz:	but I was going to say we could all meet someone and you can see it in their eyes that they are really kind hearted, good, good... good to him. 

Gerry:	Good like an aura around them?

Liz:	I am not saying you are suddenly attracted to them in a romantic way you just, you just... you know as a person you see that goodness in them. 

I:	But it isn't just the goodness Liz it's, it's... something he feels, erm... I don't want to persuade you out of your view, stay there... I still want to say he feels she struck delight, delight to my very inmost heart.

Gerry:	That's chemistry.

I:	Yes, and this is from a very morose man.

Anne:	It's that word delight you know.

I:	That's a different kind of word. 

Liz:	but...

I:	I want to ask Mike, I am sorry he is the only man here and I want to ask him.

Mike:	Yes I can see both views really I can sympathise with both views. 

((laughs))

Mike:	Really honestly that is [01.35.40]

I:	So very hard to know then, ok.

Anne:	but she is very... sorry.

Mike:	but it... does say phases of live I don't know...

I:	Oh you mean the title of the chapter...

Mike:	Is that the title of the chapter?

I:	well that's just the chapter, the title that Angie has put in when she made the book so, I don't... it's not in Jane Eyre, no you are right. So if we just have to go by what has just happened.

Mike:	It seems the consensus would be that it's amiable ((laughs)).

I:	very, very you are treading a very gentle balance there. Possibly. But you stay with your own thoughts don't feel you have got to go with the consensus by any means.

Anne:	She doesn't take advantage sort of, here she is, she doesn't, she doesn't... she could have you know she could have been you know sort of encouraging, something slightly encouraging in some way but she doesn't take advantage. She actually removes herself, so almost as if she appreciates what you are saying which is that, there has been a fire and his thoughts maybe slightly erm... 

Liz:	skewiff ((laughs))

Anne:	...  more excitable...  but she... so she doesn't take advantage of what has happened. She...

I:	I think it's more than that I think it's more like she puts herself... back away from him because strange energy was in his voice, strange fire, in his look, they are in his bedroom, he is in his dressing gown... she is cold.

Anne:	she is cold.

I:	Yes I am glad I happened to be awake I said.  And then I was going. She is getting out isn't she, she is backing off.

Sue:	Is she suppressing her feelings because I love that last paragraph and at first I thought it was a dream but she said she never thought of sleep because it's painting a picture to me. You know a stormy picture but with like have you seen the Turner painting, back to painting again I don't know much about it but the one where there is a rainbow, in it and there is this really stormy sea, and there is... if you see it..

Gerry:	Is there a ship in it?

Sue:	He is funny Turner isn't he because you have got to be at a certain point to get the full...

I:	The big round one do you mean?

Sue:	It's up in...

I:	Big round dark one?

Sue:	Yes it's up in Sudley House. 

I:	Yes

Sue:	I think it's called a storm or something.  Erm... and it's beautiful but if you look closer at it, I think there is little might even be shipwrecks little boats in the bottom.

I:	Yes there are yes.

Sue:	And it's making me think of that.

I:	Read that last paragraph then go on. I regained my head. You have got to now... fill out the form.

Liz:	I was going to say, because like last week it was like really rushed for me to actually think to fill out a form, and get into my taxi... 
 
I:	So shall we stop sooner?

Liz:	Sooner than last week just because it was very rushed and then I couldn't think to actually fill out the form.

I:	When we come to the end of this perhaps we will do the forms then, then if there is time we can read a poem. Erm.. go on then, somebody... 

Gerry:	I will do it.

I:	Ok thank you Gerry.

Gerry:	the last paragraph?  

I:	Yes, I regained my couch.

Gerry:	I regained my couch but never thought of sleep.  Till morning dawned I was tossed on a buoyant but unquiet sea, where billows of trouble rolled under surges of joy. I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters a shore. Sweet as the hills of Beulah, and now and then a freshening gale wakened by hope bore my spirit triumphantly towards the Bourne but I could not reach it even in fancy. A counteracting breeze blew off land and continually drove me back. Too feverish to rest, I rose as soon as day dawned.  

I:	Say what you think about it Sue then, go on.

Sue:	Well I mean surges of joy, is... but the troubles roll under that, normally joy is described as something that goes deeper than happiness isn't it.  And yet there is the trouble underneath that again. 

Gerry:	At this point what does she think of Rochester's position with regards to marriage, does she...

I:	She doesn't know he has been married. 

Sue:	The person that he leads her to believe he might marry hasn't come into it yet. She doesn't know about that yet.  

I:	As far as she knows he is just a bachelor.

Liz:	but also I mean it's like [01.40.29] but like would... if you are staying in a house which has just been set on fire ((laughs))...

?	by a lunatic [01.40.38]

Liz:	Something set it on fire would you sleep?  ((laughs)).

Gerry:	That's a good point actually [01.40.45].  

Liz:	Irrespective of everything just that has happened.

Gerry:	And you have heard this thing going past your door, ooh.

I:	She doesn't seem to be thinking of any of that, she doesn't seem, her sleeplessness I never thought of sleep but it's not even a possibility now,  but all the language of why she isn't sleeping is to do with water not fire, so...

Sue:	I think she is looking forward with, is it with hope? Are the hills of Beulah is that another biblical reference?

I:	Yes isn't it like a lovely place. So...

Liz:	I think that... I mean I think that because, I think that she knows that it is very, very complicated, something is going on which isn't...  she hasn't been told that there is something more behind closed doors in a sense.

Sue:	Is a Bourne a resting place?

I:	Yes, yes

Liz:	and also things like that, if it is something more going on, will it happen again and what is going to happen now ... 

I:	and all of that is probably almost unconscious so all you have got are your actual feelings of possible joy but that feels almost, that is on the top of the waves and then you have got these huge fearful currents underneath.

Anne:	I got the feeling as well because I have been concentrating on that but what.. whereas the feeling of the land, she said blowing from the land and you got that feeling of I don't know, sort of the moors or I know it doesn't influence the moors but you have got that feeling of, of land and...

Gerry:	yes because when you are on the sea you are more helpless, not as much in control are you?

I:	Absolutely not and the land she is heading to, erm... seems almost to be the counteracting breeze it's as if the place of safety what if we were in love, what if this was it, what if we did marry that place of safety seems to be also sending a breeze back at you, it's blowing you away. You are not going to get to that. And yet you... that funny tossed feeling of [01.42.54]

Gerry:	that hope, that joy is pushing you forward...

I:	forward and back, forward and back.  

Anne:	bye, bye.

?	Bye Anne.

I:	Bye Anne

?	see you next week. 

I:	A counteracting breeze blew off the land, blew off land and continually drove me back.  It's funny that that, the language of that is so sort of erm... deep and significant when we see her in action she is totally Miss Practical but when she lies down in the privacy of her bed, in the quiet, the feelings are immense they feel as if it's the whole ocean, the whole planet moving about her.

Liz:	What I was going to say I mean it is like so much unanswered you know because she could see there are questions unanswered in a sense, that would just add to the whole because like confusion, stirs up feelings and...

I:	Yes. Wow what a great extract that was, that was lovely that.  I don't know if you would like a quick read of a poem and then do your form?

?	Yes

I:	Just in case we run out of time. Quick read of poem. To Anthea who may command him anything by Robert Herrick. 

	Bid me to live and I will live, thy protestant to be.  Or bid me love, and I will give a loving heart to thee. A heart is soft, a heart is kind, a heart as sound and free, as in the whole world thou canst find that heart, I will give to thee.  Bid that heart stay and it will stay to honour they decree or bid it languish quite a way and it shall do so for thee.  Bid me to weep and I will weep, while I have eyes to see.  Having none yet I will keep a heart to weep for thee.  Bid me despair and I will despair under that cypress tree. Or bid me die and I will dare in death to die for thee. Thou art my life, my love, my heart the very eyes of me, and thou had command of every part to live and die for thee.  

	I think that is the first time I have ever read that out loud. I know it, I have read it before, but I think it's the first time I have ever read it out and erm... I am surprised by how powerful it is.

Gerry:	Very deep

Sue:	Beautiful.  

I:	the number of the word will in that poem, I will... I will... it is absolutely huge.

Liz:	I am just reading this...  [01.46.13] thought it was overemotional and embarrassing ((laughs)).  

I:	Yes well somebody always feels like that don't they. Do you want to do the forms now, and then we have got time, we can have a talk about it or not.  

Liz:	it's just that last week it was quite rushed and I had to focus on the form, because...

I:	You are right [01.46.44] at 10 to if that would be better.

Liz:	Yes.   I am going to be awkward because I haven't brought a pen again.  

Gerry:	I have, I have got one spare if you want it.

Liz:	but Liz an interesting thing happened this morning on my way into the building, at 8 o'clock one of the park men said to me, erm... I believe you have got that lady coming who doesn't like the noise of the blower, we have arranged for it to be somewhere else. 

Gerry:	Oh that's kind of them.

Liz:	That was nice of them.  

I:	I was really very surprised by that.

Gerry:	good customer service. 

I:	Yes 

[talk together]

Liz:	I was going to say,  [01.47.32] I was talking to a bloke who runs it and I mentioned about [talk over]

Mike:	changed my coat at the last minute...

Liz:	[01.47.37] the organisation and she actually said that she actually, she was singing your praises saying it's a good charity.

I:	Because we used to do a group there.  

Liz:	Oh did you... which is how she probably knows you then. 

I:	for a couple of years.  Have we got another pen.  Should maybe keep a little jar of them in here.  

Gerry:	They will go missing if you do that Jane.

I:	They do all the time.  

Liz:	I was going to say scared, scared after that... ((laughs))

I:	I will be [01.48.24] dreaming about goblins.  

Gerry:	Do you still want us to do the 2 words?

Liz:	Two words of what?

Gerry:	To describe the session is it?

I:	Yes if you had to pick two words to describe what we have just done. 

	Yes that reflect or represent...

I:	What we have just done.  

Liz:	This is when I accidentally walk away with... ((laughs))

Gerry:	This is when you steal pens. 

Liz:	Next week I am like [01.49.58]

Gerry:	Where did that pen... there is probably a load of pens rotating round this [01.50.04]

I:	do you think we have got time for a little look at the poem now or not?

Liz:	what time is it now?

I:	I make it quarter to, 

Gerry:	Just coming up to quarter to yes.

Liz:	if I remember rightly we didn't get the forms until about 5 past last week,

I:	Yes we were a bit late.

Liz:	I was a bit like but... 

I:	Bid me to live and I will live thy protestant to be. Or bid me love, and I will give a loving heart to thee.  A heart is soft, a heart is kind, a heart is sound and free, as in the whole world, that canst find that heart I will give to thee.  Bid that heart stay and it will stay to honour they decree, or bid it languish quite a way and shall it do so for thee.  Bid me to weep and I will weep, while I have eyes to see.  And having none yet I will keep a heart to weep for thee.  Bid me despair, and I will despair under that cypress tree, bid me die and I will dare in death to die for thee.  Thou art my life, my love, my heart the very eyes of me, and hast command of every part to live and die for thee.  

	Do you like it?

Liz:	It's really powerful especially when you are talking... you know in death to die for thee. 

I:	I just love the use of the word will in it, over and over, it doesn't feel...

Liz:	Almost like a... [01.52.05]

I:	Yes you think like if you are willing something to happen you think that might be a bit mechanical or false but it feels they just feel like promises to me they, it just feels like one promise after another. 

Liz:	It's like it's one step away from I do type of thing.

I:	It is yes.  Erm.. bid me to weep and I will weep.  The rhythm is lovely. Bid me to live and I will live, thy protestant to be.  Or bid me love and I will give, a loving heart to thee. I am trying to see if you can even read it without that emphasis on or bid me love and I will give a loving heart to thee.  

Liz:	I think you get the emphasis because of the comma separating the, it's... if you didn't have that comma there, you wouldn't read it in the same way, because the comma is there it stops and then I will, you know. 

I:	that is true later on as well. Erm... with erm... bid me to weep, and I will weep. Yes.

Liz:	If you didn't have that comma there, bid me to weep and I will weep it won't, it will be a lot more faster and less dramatic ((laughs)).  

I:	It's erm... To Anthea who may command him anything.  Imagine receiving this note or Mike in your case, one saying to Robert from Anthea the other way round, erm... it erm... receiving that note that says who may command me anything.  

Gerry:	It's quite overwhelming really.

I:	It is, isn't it yes. And slightly relating it back to the moment in the story, erm... she can't command him anything he is too bossy isn't he but, but towards that end where he calls her my cherished preserver, you feel as if it's getting to, it feels to me as if it's getting to some state a bit like this.   

Mike:	As in someone's spell isn’t it, when you are under someone's spell.

I:	Yes, yes. Yes that's right it's the same kind of intensity of... of being under a spell.

Liz:	I was going to say he did actually accuse her of being a witch. ((laughs)).

I:	Yes and it's a funny, witchery in somebody who is so utterly practical and seems to be not at all fairy like. Here we don't know anything of Anthea but I agree it does feel as if it is almost as if the language Mike is saying, it is like a spell it's as if, almost in reserve bid me this and that, 

Sue:	Because it's like, not instruction, instruction is the word I thought but 

I:	[talk over] yes but it feels like instruction.

Mike:	Yes

Sue:	To do bid, bid, bid.

Mike:	[01.55.24] the dog, like a lap dog. 

I:	Oh do you think so ((laughs)).  

Mike:	It is a bit.

Sue:	Aah. 

I:	But in a good way?

Mike:	yes

I:	As if erm... that thing we talked about a couple of weeks ago about that love that dogs give you, which is utterly, utterly erm... adoring and accepting...

Sue:	And unconditional.

I:	And utterly unconditional yes.

Liz:	but I was going to say I mean... I am quite aware that we read it with like... 5 women and 1 man and I was wondering what... whether it would be... and also and obviously erm... it was, who actually...

I:	Angie who chose it.

Liz:	Angie who chose it so that is another woman I do wonder whether if it was put together by a man or if it was a group of men and say one lady or something whether the... say if you just had a bunch of men here, what ...

I:	Would it be the same? 

Liz:	would it be the same.

I: 	interesting.

Gerry:	Some people might read that and think that man is very weak, you know because he is almost subjugating himself to somebody else isn't he.

Liz:	He has just been nearly practically suffocated to death.

Gerry:	No, no, I was talking about this guy here, not the erm... 

I:	We are talking about Robert Herrick.

Sue:	The only two stanzas where it doesn't start with bid he describes how the heart is, 

I:	Yes well noticed bid, bid, bid...

Sue:	That's what got me erm...

I:	Very good

Sue:	In the second one he describes how the heart is and in the last one it's like he is explaining why this is why I am bidding you. 

I:	read those two then go on?

Sue:	Just those two?

I:	Yes

Sue:	A heart as soft, a heart as kind, a heart as sound, and free as in the whole world thou canst find that heart I will give to thee.  Thou art my life, my love, my heart the very eyes of me, and hast command of every part to live and die for thee.  

I:	yes so...

Sue:	taken out... 

I:	All the others are saying bid, bid me this, tell me, tell me, tell me, but in those two then, 

Gerry:	It's more descriptive.

I:	It is yes of what it is. What he’s giving.  Do you think if you tried to translate this into a realist novel or a modern day film what do you think comes before this... the moment of him sitting down to write this poem? Do you think Anthea is... you know how close are they, is she from afar?

Liz:	You could look at it either way I mean it could be, I mean... I mean it could be his wife, and how many years of being married this is how he is, sort of showing his gratitude, or... it could be...

Sue:	It could be someone who has just saved your life ((laughs)).

Liz:	I do think though as soon as someone saves your life there is a certain whirlwind..

I:	there is a certain something. But what if there was no relationship yet between them.

Gerry:	Just admiring from afar?

Sue:	Somebody gone past in a carriage he was from quite a long time ago wasn't he, Robert Herrick?

I:	so Robert Herrick let's say he would be writing at the height of his powers, I am going to make a mad guess let's say 1640.

Sue:	Oh that far back.

I:	Yes so he was civil war, [01.59.12] civil war but he was in it erm... so and you know a man of court maybe so she could be someone he has seen across a crowded room, erm... or I mean I was thinking because I have just celebrated my 30th wedding anniversary I was thinking of my husband when I was reading this and thinking is this the kind of, erm... feeling you would have after a long connected relationship or is it erm... sorry Phil will listen to this bit, I am sorry Phil but never mind, perhaps he had better go out of the room when they are doing the listening erm... erm...  or is it the sort of thing you have when you are almost unknown to each other.

Gerry:	I think it's at the beginning because there is a freshness to it.

Liz:	I think it could be either way it could...

I:	It's lovely to think it could be erm... it would have to be a very solemn moment erm... you know to have this with somebody you know very, very well, thou art my life, my love, my heart I found that very moving the very eyes of me but at that point I began to think about ways in which my husband and I see things differently sometimes,  and erm... or don't agree about things or whereas at the beginning or even before a relationship has not even happened, you might be thinking I don't know we are utterly the same.  And erm... and hast command of every part to live and die for thee.  

Gerry:	I think the third paragraph, erm... that is what gave me the idea that it was something new, bid that heart to stay and it will stay to honour thy decree or bid it languish quite away and it will do it, whereas if they had been together a long time and were married that languishing bit wouldn't really come into it would it. So that is what has given me the  idea...

I:	[talk over] no, no. They would have already stayed or whatever it was...

Gerry:	this was quite a new relationship.

I:	So if this was at the start of something where it was do you want to go on or not go on.

Gerry:	Yes

I:	and in that again that does make me think that maybe that's partly why Angie has chosen it to go with what we have just had because this her dream, Jane's dream at the end of the passage from Jane Eyre does feel like a moment of which way is it going, which... there are cross cutting currents in her mind aren't there erm... 

Gerry:	Yes

I:	To stay or languish.

Gerry:	I think the use of the word bid it's as if they are trying to draw them in.

I:	Yes which is what Mike said at the very beginning of that spell like feeling.

Sue:	Yes

Gerry:	You bid me and I will do it, whereas if you are in a long term relationship it's not really like that is it?

I:	It's not quite like that ((laughs)), no said the voice of experience.  

Liz:	but in some ways it could be more like that in a more truer sense rather than...

I:	Yes in a deeper, in the deepest of senses yes you are right, yes I think so.

Liz:	I am just...

I:	[you are in an argumentative mood today]

Liz:	but, but but ((laughs)).

Gerry:	Sometimes you see these old couples who are in their 90s and they have been married 60 odd years, and they are madly in love and you could maybe imagine...

I:	Yes they could say that to each other...

Gerry:	them writing something like this, so it depends on the individual doesn't it.  

I:	Yes

Gerry:	How people feel.  

I:	Would anybody like to read it again before we finish?  It's a lovely poem to read.

Mike:	I don't like reading, [02.03.10]

I:	you don't like reading sure, ok.

?	I will do it. 

Liz:	I will...

I:	 Go on then you do it.

Liz:	bid me to live and I will live.  Thy protestant to be, or bid me to love and I will give a loving heart to be. A heart is soft, a heart is kind, a heart is sound and free, as if the whole world though canst find that heart I give to thee. Bid that heart stay and it will stay to honour thy decree, or bid it languish quite a way and shall do so for thee. Bid me to weep and I will weep while I have eyes to see, and having none yet I will keep a heart to weep for thee. Bid me despair and I will despair under that cypress tree, but... or bid me die and I will dare in death to die for thee.  Thou art my life, my love, my heart, the very eyes of me and hast command of every part to live and die for thee. I like that ((laughs)).

I:	yes it's lovely. Yes. Very nice.

?	Beautiful.

I:	Lovely well that's that for today. Just out of interest if we.. I already agreed that we could carry on to read Great Expectations, but does today's reading make you think you would be interested in reading Jane Eyre?

Liz:	Yes

Sue:	I love Jane Eyre.

I:	Possibly.

Gerry:	I still like Great Expectations.

Sue:	I do too I think it's hard to choose. 

Gerry:	I love it where he’s going through the graveyard.

Liz:	I was going to say most of what we have read I want to read.

Gerry:	very atmospheric.

I:	Want to read more of?

Liz:	I want to read more of...

I:	Good choices in Angie's book then?

?	Oh yes, yes, yes.

Liz:	I mean it's like that last I found the actual, I made a mental note of what it was, and actually found it in that book store in New Brighton, and bought it.

Sue:	Is that the one opposite the station?

Liz:	Yes

?	I must go there I have heard about that.

I:	It's meant to be really good.

Liz:	I am normally in a car there and I was hanging around there and when I was walking past I thought because it isn't really ideal to be parking up around there, it's far too hilly to be...

Sue:	I think they have events there.

I:	They do.

Sue:	I think it is on the radio I heard it, yes.

I:	Great, that was lovely thank you very much.

Mike:	Thanks Jane

Sue:	I might have trouble continuing after my 12 week stint because erm.. they are being a bit funny about me using it, it's flexible time, and I asked for a day a Friday off, a whole Friday off as annual leave and the manager started to say but you have been told that flexible, and I stopped her there and in my best voice with my hardest stare said its annual leave it's nothing to do with flexi.  

Gerry:	Well that's true.

Sue:	Yes but I am going to try.

Gerry:	where is it you work?

Sue:	In the university but we are a very small department erm... 

Liz:	[02.06.37]

I:	Oh yes we collect them, great good excellent. Yes, please do, please do. Oh great, very good thank you very good, [02.06.48]

?	I have got try and get here earlier on a Wednesday night to have a look at those shelves down there. 

I:	Yes all only a pound.

?	I did get a big thick erm... volume of Robertson's Davies my daughter-in-law introduced me to him which I actually took with me and read on the plane to Canada, finished while I was there and said to her I don't want to carry that back with me can I leave it here and she said well my copy is in your book case so we swopped I didn't know it was there.  It's funny how life works.  

?	See you  next week.

	Bye. 




