Sue: 	[0.0.06] which is right next to... it's a university area, it's like erm... it is not quite as downmarket as Smithdown Road but it's like a student area close to the university. So it is not Edgbaston or Bourneville [0.00.21] which are lovely.

Anne:	But  haven't [0.00.24] university.

Sue:	The university is lovely.  The campus is so beautiful erm... those students are so fortunate. [0.00.40] and grass and trees and [0.00.42]

Liz:	Is this the University of Liverpool?

Sue:	Birmingham.  

Liz:	Oh Birmingham.

Sue:	It is a really lovely campus and of course they  have got the Barber Institute there which is their art gallery  and that is fabulous.  There is erm... you go in and there is a  big statute just by the stairs going up and I looked at it, because I don't know much about it, it's by Rodin and  I thought to myself it's  [00.01.10] it's just there, you can touch it if you wanted to.  ((laughs)).  

Anne:	Which Barber is that?

Sue: 	 I don't know oh you are thinking of a musical?

Anne:	No because there was an artist in Liverpool called Barber in the 19th century and I wonder whether and they were from Birmingham and I wondered whether the connection...

Sue:	Maybe.

?	Hello.  

Sue:	I haven't been for a long time, and they have an exhibition by erm... I didn't know, what's his name [01.59] I didn't know he had a sister but they had an exhibition with her paintings. All I know he was the pub, sorry to say but... 

I:	I have had an apology from Gerry this morning but not from Frank so I am still expecting him, erm... so we will just wait a few minutes and see if he shows up soon.  Its the swap over session today so after this one you are going downstairs to do the design.  

Liz:	But that's next week is it or?

I:	Yes next week yes.  

Anne:	You will be sorry to see us go ((laughs))

I:	Yes of course I will.  Yes.  I have to start all again.  

Anne:	 Will you do the same stories?

I:	Yes we have to, we have to do exactly the same.

Liz:	Oh it will be the same...

I:	Yes, yes.  

Sue:	Oh right

I:	someone having coffee tea?  

Mike:	The zips broken...

I:	Yes that is horrible. Do you need any help.

Sue:	You need two hands to hold the bottom bit.  

I:	Yes, yes, now Sue come on... 

Sue:	Oh right ok. I am scared of my hands slipping and hitting you in the face, which wouldn't be good.

I:	Is it possible to get it off Mike over the top of your head and then we could fix it while it's...

Mike:	Yes it might be.  

I:	good job you were able to get it off over your head.  

Anne:	Just look at the back and see if there is anything caught.  

I:	I put the radiator on it was off, so if it gets very hot just give me the sign and I will turn it off again.

Anne:	It was funny I think a few times when we have been working when I have left I could see all the window completely steamed up ((laughs)).

Sue:	Coffee or tea?

I:	No thanks no.

Anne:	I am alright thanks.

Mike:	[04.33]

I:	Oh dear.  Perhaps Sue can do it later.

Sue:	I will have a go.

I:	I thought this day to finish off we would read page 409 which has the subtitle When Youth is far behind and it's a story called Faith and Hope Go Shopping.

	Faith and Hope Go Shopping.

	It is Monday, so it must be rice pudding again.  It is not so much the fact that they are careful of our teeth here, at the Meadow Bank Home, rather a general lack of imagination.  Is that you Grace, are you ok?

	Yes

I:	A general lack of imagination.  As I told Claire the other day, there are lots of things you can eat without having to chew. Oysters, Foie Gras, avocado vinaigrette, strawberries and cream, crème brulee with vanilla and nutmeg. Why then this succession of bland puddings and gummy meats.  Claire the sulky blonde, always chewing a wad of gum looked at me as if I were mad, fancy food they claim upsets the stomach. God forbid our remaining taste buds should be over stimulated.  I saw Hope grinning round the last mouthful of ocean pie and I knew she had heard me. Hope maybe blind, but she is no slouch. Faith and Hope with names like that we might be sisters. Kelly, that's the one with the exaggerated lip liner thinks we are quaint.  Chris sometimes sings to us when he is cleaning out the rooms, Faith, Hope and Charity is one of the best of them I suppose, cheery and irreverent, he is always in trouble for talking to us. He wears tight t-shirts and an earring. I tell him the last thing we want is charity and that makes him laugh. Hinge and Bracket he calls us, Butch and Sundance, I am not saying it's a bad place here it's just so ordinary.  Not the comfortable, ordinariness of home with its familiar grime and clutter.  But that of waiting rooms and hospitals, a pastel detergent place with a smell of air freshener and distance bedpans.  We don't get many visits as a rule.  I am one of the lucky ones, my son Tom calls every fortnight with my magazines and a bunch of crysanths.  The last ones were yellow. And any news he thinks won't upset me.  But he isn't much of a conversationalist, are you keeping well then mam, and a comment or two about how the garden is all he can manage but he means well.  As for Hope she has been here 5 years, even longer than me, and she hasn't had a visitor yet.   Last Christmas I gave her a box of my chocolates and told her they were from her daughter in California she gave me one of her sardonic little smiles, if that is from Priscilla sweetheart she said primly then you are Ginger Rogers.  I laughed at that,  I have been in a wheelchair for 20 years and the last time I did any dancing was just before men stopped wearing hats.  

	Lets stop there for a minute and just have a quick orientation, where are we, how are you finding it so far, are you thinking of anything.  

Liz:	It's making me smile ((laughs))

I:	yes it's a brave chirpy tone of voice isn't it for somebody who is in a pretty bad situation.

Liz:	Yes quite a dry type of erm... dry outlook on things.

I:	Yes

Sue:	I like them both.  

I:	both the people?

Sue:	Because from the title you wouldn't  know that they were people would you until you start to read because it could be an attitude you know two people go shopping with faith and hope in their hearts if you like.

I:	But here they are, Faith and Hope erm... wanting something lovely to eat.  

Liz:	I am just thinking it's a shame that there isn't another character called Charity ((laughs)). 

I:	Yes that would go well maybe one of the... we will see if one comes.

Liz:	[talk over - 09.04]

I:	Any of you had a lot to do with care homes?

Anne:	My mum.  Well she wasn't in a care home, but she actually broke her hip last November and had to go into rehabilitation and it reminds me of all that. 

Sue:	I [09.27] see my mum, even though I will never go, she would never... we would never have got her in one of those but erm... it's the taste, it's the taste when we discovered my mum was diabetic all she wanted was something tasty, you know.

I:	And you can't have that.

Anne:	My mum, the entire... she was in hospital a year before because she fell downstairs ((laughs)) and she refused to eat any of the food and she wouldn't eat any, and she lost so much weight, she is always a very, very fussy eater so all this... you know, she... I suppose when you, they do say that when you are older it isn't so much I think this choice of food they are talking about isn't... I think, one thing that when you are older you do fancy particular things it isn't just you know we are... sort of oysters foie gras we think oh you know, she is used to that but also... also when the people eat particular things and they just eat those particular things.

I:	Yes then they... that's right so, 

Liz:	I was going to say in this type of setting they are probably they would be catering for the whole load so... because like they can't...

I:	feed everybody with foie gras...

Liz:	You know but with rice pudding it's...

I:	Its easy to serve 56 people.

Sue:	Mind you it's easy to make it nicer as well, my mum made a gorgeous rice pudding ((laughs)).

I:	Ok so we have got this little relationship between the two of them and erm... and as you say Liz quite dry and witty.  

	We managed though, Hope pushes me around in my chair, and I direct her.  Not that there is much directing to do in here, she can get around just by using the ramps, but the nurses like to see us using our resources it fits in with their waste not want not ethic, and of course, I read to her. Hope loves stories, in fact she is the one who started me reading in the first place. We have had Wuthering Heights and Pride and Prejudice and Doctor Zhivago.  There aren't many books here but the library van comes round every 4 weeks and we sent Lucy out to get us something nice.  Lucy is a college student on work experience, so she knows what to choose.  Hope was furious when she wouldn't let us have Lolita though.  Lucy thought it wouldn't suit us.   

	Lolita for... two of you are laughing so could you just say why that is funny in case anyone doesn't know what Lolita is?

Sue:	I don't... I can't remember I think I would remember if I had read. But isn't it Nabokov?

I:	Yes

Sue:	And it caused a sensation at the time did it?

I:	Yes because it's about a young man's relationship... erm... a man's relationship with a young girl, yes.

Anne:	what always comes over is this feeling that you have to protect you know, sort of... you know they can't have what they want they have to be... the news has to be protector, everything has to protect.

I:	Mild no big whatever it is, not much flavour.

Anne:	So why is it that that is necessary? Is it just, is it thought generally in culture that sort of maybe if you can't do anything about it you get very upset or she doesn't sound the sort of person that would get very upset about , or very sensitively and emotionally upset about so why is it that as a sort of culture we have to... like children you don't tell children when you are adults, when you are old you don't... you guard them why is that?

I:	I’m just thinking about, because of when you swap over into design and you are thinking about decor so here when the council ran this building, most of the rooms are painted this sort of colour now it might be that if you had a house you might paint it those colours but if this was in fact a millionaire's country mansion it's very unlikely that it would be decorated like this. 

Sue:	It would be vivid.

I:	Vivid and rich colours would be used.  So why just because it's been paint is the same price, so why would you choose something for a public building that is fantastically bland.

Sue:	Does it make things and people more manageable. 

I:	If it's bland. 

Sue:	I am thinking of my mum again because I... I don't like politics, I don't listen to it, I switch the radio off, I find a story, drama anything... 

Liz:	You just want to [14.00]

Sue:	It gets my mum going and she... she knew so much about politics and if anybody dared to come to the house ((laughs)) she used to have great arguments with them.

I:	So that's like rich, tasty food in a way isn't it? Strong flavours.

Sue:	I think so.  

Anne:	Is it just that erm... because there are a whole variety, say like coming to this building a whole variety of comings so you don't know what people's tastes are and one might accept... and one mightn't so they just have bland, so and there is all kinds of research into colour schemes isn't there so... you know...

Liz:	there is a lot of, there is a lot of like you know because different colour schemes will actually affect your mood and stuff like that and if you... if you want a sort of professional working environment this maybe what they think is a bit more...

I:	Pale lilac.

Liz:	Pale lilac is...

I:	Calms you down, lets you get on with work. 

Liz:	You know perhaps they think that’s more suitable rather than...

I:	Now just be honest who believes that the council has put that much thought into their colour schemes?

Sue:	No they are not that thoughtful.

Anne:	It is just the colour scheme of the council isn't it?

I:	if it was Google's Head  Quarters possibly, someone would have put thought into it, sorry for the benefit of the tape, anybody from the council listening to this but it's true isn't it?

Sue:	I worked for the council once, in fact I had my interview here, one summer as a student and erm... yes I haven't got the greatest opinion of them, but I am just thinking my son and his wife painted a bedroom in my old house, pink and red, and when they said the colours I thought oh... and I wouldn't have dared to do it, I don't think I would have got the right shades but I am looking at that tree out there now and I am thinking how lovely if these walls were pink and the ceiling was red and you know it sort of brings you out to that view. Wouldn't that be lovely.

I:	Yes, go there, yes.

Liz:	It depends on how you react to the colours. 

Sue:	but it worked.

Liz:	And  also if you actually work in a place, or  sleeping in a place...

Sue:	That is different

Liz:	You are going to be choosing something where it's... I mean a few, well quite a few years back my parents redecorated my room when I was away on a school trip and they were saying you know they were suggesting colour schemes because they hadn't told me [16.19] and they said about red and green and I was like red and green do not go together and they were like, oh... ((laughs)) that is what they had done. 

I:	Well what you are saying, what everybody is saying. Page 411 Lynsey really is individuals might choose things and that is up to us, but... but for the council we are going to choose the least offensive thing because there is lots of people and it looks like in the care home here, erm... Hope was furious when she wouldn't let us have Lolita though Lucy thought it wouldn't suit us. So, the fact that somebody is doing your thinking for you, making that choice for you, she thought it wouldn't suit us rather than, she gave it to us and we decided it didn't suit us or they think rice pudding is easier to digest for everybody so... is it that losing control of yourself?

Liz:	I suppose if you have been asked to pick out stories and stuff for someone, you would... you are more likely to go for some classics, something which is tried... which is you know which you know is more likely to... because you don't want to bring something back and get oh... 

I:	And they say oh it's all about sex.

Liz:	Your choice is [17.33]

Anne:	that is the difference you see because the choice is Lolita and that it isn't just a... it's a particular book, with a particular frame and therefore erm... it's, it is... it is...

I:	It sounds like they wanted it.

Anne:	Yes

I:	She wouldn't let us have...

Anne:	and when you are older isn't this idea that you know your parents never did that sort of thing when you think when you are a child and sort of it's that,  I mean there are a lot of... there are a lot of couples that go into where they are cared for and... and this is not you know anything to do with sex, is not acceptable is it when you think about it.  I don't mean isn't acceptable but I mean... it isn't thought to be you know that people, and yet you hear about people fathering children at great ages ((laughs)).

I:	I don't know anything about what happens to married couples when they go into care, never mind, let's leave that, lets press on.

Liz:	I was going to say... I was going to say this sounds that Faith actually asked Lucy saying you know have you seen Lolita you know... if you see it you know.

I:	but Lucy thought it wouldn't suit us.

Sue:	I think that's the different feeling on Lucy's part though than the bland institutionalised.

I:	Why?

Sue:	Because I don't know I think she is thinking, being a bit... well I was going to say I thought she was being a bit more sensitive but I read on a little bit and erm... I don't know if she is or not.

I:	Lets read on a bit.  

Anne:	Can I...

I:	Lets just go on a bit longer, keep at that point.

	One of the greatest writers of the 20th century and you thought he wouldn't suit us. Hope used to be a Professor at Cambridge and still has that imperious twang in her voice, sometimes but I could tell Lucy wasn't really listening.  They get that look, even the brighter ones that nursery nurse smile which says, I know better, I know better because you are old. It's the rice pudding all over again Hope tells me, rice pudding for the soul.  If Hope taught me to appreciate literature, it was I who introduced her to magazines.  They have been my passion for years, fashion, glossies and society pages, restaurant reviews and film releases, I started her out on book reviews, slightly taking her off guard with an article here or there, or a fashion page there.  We found I had quite a talent for description and now we wade deliciously together through the pages of bright ephemera moaning over Cartier diamonds and Chanel lipsticks and Lush impossible glows. It's strange really when I was young those things really didn't interest me I think Hope was more elegant than I was, after all there were college balls, and academy parties and summer picnics on the Backs, of course now we are both the same.  Nursing home chic. Things tend to be communal here, some people forget what belongs to them, so there is a lot of pilfering I carry my  nicest things with me, in the rack under my wheelchair, I have my money and what is left of my jewellery hidden in the seat cushion.  I am not supposed to have money here, there is nothing to spend it on, and we are not allowed out unaccompanied, there is a combination lock on the door and some people try to slip out with visitors as they leave. Mrs McAllister, 92 spry, mad as a hatter, keeps escaping  she thinks she is going home.  It must have been the shoes that began it, slick patent, candy apple red with heels which went on forever. I found them in one of my magazines and cut out the picture, sometimes I brought it out and looked at it in private, feeling dizzy, and a little foolish.  I don't know why, it wasn't as if it was a picture of a man or anything like that, they were only shoes. Hope and I wear the same kind of shoes, lumpy, leatherette slip-ons in porridge beige, eminently, indisputably suitable.  But in secret we moan over  Manolo Blahniks with 6 inch perspex heels or Gina mules in fuchsia suede or Jimmy Choos in hand painted silk. It was absurd of course, but I wanted those shoes with a fierceness which almost frightened me. I wanted just once to step out into the glossy, gleeful pages of one of my  magazines, to taste the recipes, see the films, read the books.  To me the shoes represented all of that, their cheery brazen redness, their frankly impossible heels, shoes made for anything, lolling, lounging, prowling, strutting, flying,  anything but walking.   

	Erm... well now go on so, erm... what do you think of this old lady and her magazines?

Lynsey:	Do you know it's funny I don't know if its... I am really sorry I am late.

I:	It's ok, are you alright?

Lynsey:	Yes, yes, yes fine yes. Just baby things you know, yes ((laughs)). But so I started from the beginning I just sort of skim read the other bits, 

I:	Just tried to catch in yes.

Lynsey:	I don't know what it is, but none of this rings true to me at all.  It just... it just erm... I don't know if it's the sort of the you know the sort of authorial voice that is like she has chosen for the... for the... for the women but it just...

I:	It is not real ((laughs))

Lynsey:	It just doesn't ring true. I mean, you know I mean...  I have spent, I have spent not quite a lot of time in like old people's homes, I mean I have visited you know a whole succession of relatives in old people's homes so, you know sort of almost all through my life really and I don't know if this is a different kind of home but... but... but... you know in my experience people have only gone into homes when they are sort of like literally like right near the end and... and erm...  I suppose I don't know if she is sort of she is trying to say that a lot of people even though they are physically infirm their brains are still totally working, but I don't know if it's... I don't know if it's partly a sort of class thing as well because you know she is talking about somebody who is an ex-prof... you  know a woman who was a professor at Cambridge I mean that's, I mean there must have only been about 2 female professors at Cambridge at the time that she is talking about you know what I mean so we are talking about quite rarefied company I suppose but I just suppose none of it just sort of rings true with what I imagine. Well not what I imagine but my experience.

I:	It probably is quite different to a lot of erm... care homes but I imagine there must be, in fact I know there are, erm... people like Diana Athill for example who erm... is a journalist who writes a lot, now she is in a home and yet erm... she is quite posh, in fact she is very posh.

Lynsey:	Extremely and that is what I mean, the home that she lives in, is... I just always imagine it to be sort of just one in a million it's basically a home for extremely posh intellectuals who have got very, very old isn't it?  

I:	Yes, yes

Lynsey:	that she lives in and it's almost like that is what she is talking about but... but... 

I:	This is probably more, more ordinary than that but I am just saying there must be posh people who are old,

Lynsey:	Oh of course, yes of course. 

I:	and they have to go somewhere.

Lynsey:	Of course yes.  Yes, yes.

Sue:	This seems very true to me...

Anne:	Really?

Sue:	I know two people who could be these people.

Lynsey:	Oh really.

Sue: 	In a few years time. One of them is 71 and is having the time of her life, after having a bombshell dropped on her when she found out her husband was seeing somebody else and he has now married her and it was after a long, long...

Lynsey:	in her 70s?

Sue:	she is 71 now I think, 72. Erm... but if you saw her, so she is so glamorous, she goes to America, she goes... she has got a house in France, she is posh, and I could see her and this other... her crazy friend who they are both my friends now, erm... I could see them like this before they become institutionalised.  

Lynsey:	right, oh so when they have just been there for a bit?

Sue:	I think so.

Lynsey:	But [26.07] into their 90s or something...

Sue:	going to reach that point where they can't do things for themselves I don't know.

Anne:	I find it immensely sad and disturbing because, 

I:	This is three very strong reactions.

Anne:	Because one spends ones youth trying to be something like professor of Cambridge and then... and there comes a point where it doesn't matter that you know, you... that you were a professor a Cambridge. All that you have spent your life trying to be, you get to other side of your life, the other end and suddenly none of what you have worked at, occupied, it becomes irrelevant and... and that...

I:	And then you are just an older person.

Anne:	I find it very, very disturbing.  

Sue:	That's true, yes, yes it is.  

Anne:	and also I mean the things that you know when she was younger she wouldn't have thought of it as she said, and is there a pushing thing... things push you in that way so, I mean because she wouldn't have thought it when she was younger, I don't think it's because now she has got the time I think it is... you think different things and things that you wouldn't have thought when you were... had your energy and strength and independence suddenly you have to... you suddenly start thinking it's like with my hip, I look at benches more, you know and I would never have done that, and things push you in that way and I find it so upsetting.

I:	I think that is interesting and I am thinking about for example gardening when I was in my childhood, teens and 20s and probably into my 30s I couldn't have been less interested in the idea of a garden, and I can remember having friends who liked gardening and just thinking that is weird.  Really weird. And then suddenly after about the age of 35 I started really, really wanting to grow things. Now what... you know and now I have, I have a garden it is slightly in wrack and ruin but it is something I think about it a lot, and I look at it, I want to look at things that are in the garden, and I don't know what... where has that come from but it's one of those changes you are describing isn't it? 

Anne:	and...

I:	But I just want to... before we go any further is we need to stay in the story and be in the story so keep, rather than talking about me let us try and talk about them so, the bit where she is talking about those shoes, because I made a recent decision never to wear high heels ever again.

Anne:	I love the way they say heels that went on forever. ((laughs)).

I:	I don't know whether I am going to be able to live with it I don't know but I... 

Anne:	Not after reading this.

I:	Yes but I have not worn them very much in my life but occasionally I would want to wear them but now I have decided no, only flat shoes.

Liz:	I wonder whether, when she was younger whether she did wear these because I wonder if she did, whether she would be longing after it now because you know...

Sue:	Because she used to, yes. 

Liz:	Because I mean for example if you used to wear them when you were younger, and you know how problematic they are, you know... you know you also,  yes you remember the glamour of it but you are also going to remember the impracticalities of it.

I:	[talk over] but she says on page 14, when I was younger, it is strange really when I was younger those things didn't interest me.  I think Hope was more elegant than I was. She had... Hope had occasions college balls, academy parties etc, to wear them but she doesn't say much about what she wore.

Anne:	Is it still... sorry... when you think things, when you... as I said you know when you are older is that still development and growth. I mean are we looking at this as development and growth or somebody who is in decline who is...

I:	Let's ask them, what do you think? Are you still developing?

Mike:	It's all about putting people into boxes and telling them how to conform and you can't do this, you can't do that, like the government are doing now with a lot of people.

I:	Yes so if you were in a care home or it's a bit like being at school or something where somebody just tells you...

Mike:	yes taps you on the [30.35]

I:	Eat rice pudding.   

Liz:	I mean I think in some ways I mean, I think it's... in some ways bad for the care home to not get to know what characters are in their and what they are... 

I:	Personality is.  

Liz:	Their personality is and what... and what even little things which would you know little things which won't take a lot of effort will suit them.

I:	And I think some homes do do that, don't they and I know I have visited Hoylake Cottage Hospital where one of the erm... carers was telling me that a man with dementia who had been going round sort of standing in front of windows going like this, and they couldn't work out what was the matter and he was disturbing everybody by going up to the windows and doing this, and doing it to doors, and then they found out that he had been a joiner, and that what he was really doing was like sizing things up so they brought him a tape measure, and he just spends all day then measuring things and was really happy to be measuring them.  It's wonderful that somebody would think of that but it's very, very easy for somebody not to have thought of it isn't it, or in fact from the story it seems as if that is the norm here. 

Lynsey:	Yes but when you say that... that erm... example, to me if that... if I had read that in this, in a book I would have thought oh my gosh that just absolutely hits it, it just hits the nail, but nothing I have read in this section so far hits it, it doesn't seem to. I don't know if it's because we have been reading you know like Silas Marner and Great Expectations and stuff and I am reading this and thinking...

I:	This is not true enough.

Lynsey:	This isn't as well written nothing is going ooh like that and your anecdote there just went aah...

I:	Right ok she wants to feel something. Alright...

Sue:	The language is different but I think  there are certain things in it, I love the one about her mouth around the ocean pie, and I know it's going back a little bit but it just gives you, it paints a picture doesn't it, it just gives you an image. The way that she words it.

I:	Well let's keep going and see what else happens then, see... it's hard I think when you do begin to think oh I don't really like this, it's not good enough that's quite hard erm... so just stay patient Lindsey.

Lynsey:	Oh yes, yes, no, no I want to.

I:	Would somebody else like to read? Please...

Mike:	where are we?

I:	We are at the bottom of page 412 I kept the picture in my purse.

Mike:	I kept the picture in my purse occasionally taking it out and unfolding it like a map, to secret treasure. It didn't take Hope long to find out I was hiding something. I know it's stupid, I said, maybe I am going peculiar, I will probably end up like Mrs Banjee wearing 10 overcoats and stealing people's underwear. Hope laughed at that, I don't think so Faith I understand you perfectly well.  She felt on the table in front of her, for her tea cup, I knew better than to guide her hand.  You want to do something unsuitable, I want a copy of Lolita you want a pair of red shoes, both of those things are equally unsuitable for people like us, she drew a little closer lowering her voice, is there an address on the page she asked?  There was I told her, a Knightsbridge address, it might as well have been Australia. Hey Butch and Sundance it was cheery Chris who had come to clean the windows, planning a heist.  Hope smiled, no Christopher she said slyly an escape.  We planned it with the furtive cunning of prisoners of war, we had one great advantage the element of surprise.  We were not habitual escapees, like Mrs McAllister but trusties, nicely lucid and  safely mobile.  There would have to be a diversion I suggested, something which would bring a duty nurse away from the desk leaving the entrance unguarded. Hope took to waiting by the door, listening to the sound of the key pads until she was almost certain she could duplicate the combination.  We timed it

((laughs))

	... with [34.43] old campaigners. At 9 minutes to 9 on Friday morning I picked up one of Mr Bannerman's cigarette butts from the common room and hid it in the paper filled metal bin in my room. At 8 minutes to Hope and I were in the lobby on our way to the breakfast room, 10 seconds later as expected the sprinkler went off.  On our corridor I could hear Mrs McAllister screaming fire, fire. Kelly was on duty, clever Lucy might have remembered to secure the doors, thick Clare might not have left the desk at all, but Kelly grabbed the nearest fire extinguisher from the wall and ran towards the smoke.  Hope pushed me towards the door and felt for the keypad, it was 7 minutes to 9.  Hurry she will be back at any moment.  Shh beep, beep, beep, beep, got it I knew one day I would find a use for those music lessons that they gave me as a child.  The door slid open, we crunched out onto sunlit gravel.    This was where Hope would need my help, no ramps here in the real world, I tried not to stare mesmerised at the sky, the trees. Tom hadn't taken me out of the building for over  6 months. Straight ahead, turn left, stop there is a pothole in front of us, take it easy, left again.  I remembered a bus stop just in front of the gates, the buses were like clockwork, 5 to and 20 past the hour, you could hear them from the common room, honking and ratcheting past like cranky pensioners.  For a dreadful moment I was convinced the bus stop had gone. There were roadwork's where it had once stood, bollards lined the kerb then I saw it, 50 years further down a temporary bus stop on the shortened metal post.  The bus appeared at the brow of the hill huffing.   Quick full speed ahead, Hope reacted quickly. Her legs are long and still muscular, she did ballet as a child, I learned forward clutching my purse tightly, and held out my hand, behind us I heard a cry, glancing back at the windows of the Meadowbank Home I saw Kelly at my bedroom window her mouth open yelling something.  For a second I wasn't sure the bus would even take an old lady in a wheelchair, but it was the hospital circular and there was a special ramp.  The driver gave us a look of indifference and waved us aboard. Then Hope and I were on the bus, clinging to each other like giddy school girls, laughing. People looked at us but mostly this was without suspicion. A little girl looked at me and smiled, I realised how long ago it must have been since I saw anyone young.

I:	Very nice lovely thank you.  Erm... 

Liz:	I love the fact that obviously the young girl is actually reacting to them giggling like... like young girls in a sense, it's like a sort of unspoken communication between them.

I:	Yes, yes. I think the erm... there is a funny, I am just trying to slightly half share Lindsey's reservations just to keep you company Lindsey, and erm... I am thinking on the one hand it is a bit like erm... a farce but you know it's like sort of not real, with the timings and the... would really they...

Liz:	It's like a dream really.

I:	Had that possibly have happened but things like it was 6 months since I had been out of the building, that is real.

Sue:	That is really sad that. 

I:	And so is I realised how long ago it must have been since I saw anyone young.

Lynsey:	Yes, yes no... 

I:	those little moments you do feel got.

Sue:	Yes. But the rest does seem implausible.  I want it to be true, I want them to have done it but it doesn't seem [38.29] does it?

I:	When we were reading the other things  in there sort of Great Expectations or Silas Marner, sort of classics of Victorian realism, and also I think we began to think as we were reading realism of inside, you.

Lynsey:	Yes of consciousness.

I:	Yes really.

Lynsey:	Yes, yes

I:	but we have gone into a different mode with this, this is like turning from you know...

Anne:	Action

I:	Yes action and almost like cartoon, 

Liz:	Yes, it's a cartoon script isn't it.

I:	It's a different type of thing, but maybe because it's about something quite serious and sad, which is how trapped or demeaned or limited you might be in a care home, and presumably it's something most of us are a bit scared of you know, I often consider that.

Liz:	I know quite a few people who do not want to go into a care home.  And to be quite honest I mean in some ways the people I am thinking of, if I mean if I am able to actually prevent them going I will because, you know... 

I:	You would want to. 

Anne:	I think we are missing something slightly because as well as what was being said, they themselves have a certain erm... the way they look at other people isn't, isn't sort of, they are closed as well. Although they want to escape they... they are closed to the other residents you know they... just as the staff are to them they are to the other residents. And they are to some of the staff.

Lynsey:	Oh they are fantastically snobby.  

((laughs))

Lynsey:	I mean this thing you know, sort of... it's just kind of laden with value judgements about the staff you know just the assumption, describing one as clever, one as thick you know and one is jolly it's just really cliché.

Anne:	Even to the other inmates you know they, you know they make fun of them... they are not sort of...

Lynsey:	Us two we are special we are, we are different.

I:	But don't you think

Liz:	It's like because she was like a professional you know whatever she was...

Lynsey:	Cambridge

Liz:	And you know they think that we are better than this, and the other residents might as well have been care assistants themselves you know.

Lynsey:	Exactly it's that thing where it tips over from thinking we are better than this, to then going further and saying we are better than you.

Anne:	I think it's ever so funny that she... when erm... Hope reacted quickly, her legs long and still muscular, she did ballet as a child ((laughs)) as if that would make a difference at this age.  

Sue:	[41.13] just haven't got enough to exercise their intellect.  

I:	I can imagine being a bit like that myself even though you know you, I think when you are in a...

Lynsey:	Sort of [41.29]

I:	I am just thinking back to school you know I wasn't a well integrated child at school but I definitely know I would have had crude, rough opinions of most of my classmates it was like yes you are snotty, you wear too much lipstick you are... you know, you are a big head, you are... you know you are a teacher's pet,  all of those possible categories I am sure I would have... I would imagine, it is quite easy to still have those.

Liz:	Is that a good thing though?

I:	No I don't... I am not proud of it, I am just... but I just think...

Lynsey:	I suppose what, you know probably just having a go at really is that you can probably do all those things, you can be sort of like you know have a character who is sort of like cruelly you know sort of, you know... you know because it's the characters who think that that Clare is thick and Lucy is clever and what not, but I suppose it's that you can describe it in a way that is more erm... I suppose again...

I:	Generous?

Lynsey:	No not necessarily generous because you can have very unsympathetic characters and just think wow that's a really well drawn character, I suppose I am just not getting any sense, or I am not feeling any sense that they are well drawn characters at all.

Liz:	I just think that they are a bit above, you know I mean above the average Joe, be it care workers, be it nurse, you know be it nurses, be it... 

I:	What she says is...

Liz:	[talk over  [42.57]in the care home might as well be...

I:	[talk over] clever Lucy, so clever could be  a word of praise but we know that it was Lucy who prevented them getting Lolita out of the library so in fact is...

Lynsey:	Probably just being canny.

I:	Is it you know erm... is it really praise or is it just like, some of them will be cleverer than others some of them will be thick, some of them will be lazy, some of them will be active...

Lynsey:	But people are more than that on top of all those things.

I:	Yes but I mean just imagine being just [43.33]

Lynsey:	They are being [43.33] about her and...

I:	And they are [43.35] back. Yes probably you are right.

Anne:	I think it's... I think it's a shame, and it's also telling that the bus they get on is a hospital circular, they are not getting away ((laughs)).

Sue:	It's going to bring them back.  

I:	Alright lets go on.

Lynsey:	It gets them as far as the station doesn't it?

I:	we were up to I realised how long it must have been since I saw anyone and so Sue would you continue from there.

Sue:	Yes. We got off at the railway station, with some of the money in the chair cushion I bought two tickets to London, I panicked for a moment, when the ticket man asked for my pass but Hope told him in her  Cambridge professor's voice, that we would pay the full fare.  The ticket man rubbed his head for a minute and then shrugged please yourself he said.  The train was long and smelt of coffee and burnt rubber.  I guided Hope to where the guard had let down the ramp.  Going down to the smoke are we ladies? The guard sounded a little like Chris, his cap pushed back cockily from his forehead.  Let me take that for you love, he said to Hope meaning the wheelchair but Hope shook her head.  I can manage, thank you. Straight up old girl, I told her. I saw the guard noticing Hope's blind eyes but he didn't say anything, I was glad. Neither of us can stand that kind of thing.  The piece of paper with the Knightsbridge address was still in my purse, as we sat in the guard's van, with coffee and scones brought to us by the cheery guard, I unfolded it again. Hope heard me doing it and smiled.  Is it ridiculous I asked her, looking at the shoes again, shiny and red as Lolita lollies. Are we ridiculous? Of course we are she answered serenely sipping her coffee. And isn't it fun.   It only took 3 hours  to get down to London, I was expecting much longer but trains like everything else, move faster nowadays. We drank coffee again and talked to the guard whose name was not Chris I learnt but Barry. And I described what countryside I could see to Hope, while it blurred past at top speed. It's alright, Hope reassured me, you don't have to do it all now, just see it first and we will go over it altogether in our own time when we get back.  It was nearly lunchtime when we arrived in London, King's Cross was much bigger than I had imagined it, all glass and glorious grime. I tried to see it as well as I could whilst directing Hope through the crowds of people of all colours and ages. For a few moments even Hope seemed disorientated and we dithered on the platform, wondering where all the porters had gone.  Everyone but us seemed to know exactly where they were going and people with brief cases jostled against the chairs, as we stood trying to work out where to go.  I began to feel some of my courage erode. Oh Hope I whispered, I am not sure I can do this anymore.  But Hope was undeterred, rubbish she said brazenly.  There will be taxis, over there where the draft is coming from.  She pointed to our left where I did see a sign high above our heads which read Way Out.  We will do as everyone does here, we will get a cab, onwards.  And at that we pushed right through the mass of people on the platform, Hope saying excuse me, in her Cambridge voice, me remembering to direct her.  I checked my purse again and Hope chuckled, this time I wasn't looking at the picture though, £200 seems like inexpressible riches at the Meadowbank Home,  but the train fare had taught me that prices too had speeded up during our years away from the world I wondered if we would have enough.  

I:	Erm... want to say anything, anybody?

Anne:	So much worry. 

I:	Yes

Anne:	So much worry and you know when you have an idea, but it's like you know in the film Amadeus when he is you know, Salieri is going to the mountains sort of [47.40] the death of Mozart and then when you actually have to do it with your own hands, and it's that kind of thing. It is isn't, things, when you actually come to do it aren't as clear cut and I... I find London difficult and I really feel for her.

I:	I could feel several people nodding at that point.

Liz:	I was reading it thinking yes that's London, [48.07] It says about bigger than I imagine all glass and glorious grime I mean grime is not a nice [48.17] ((laughs)) 

Anne:	It's funny glass and grime because somehow you imagine grime as being soot and black and we have got glass but there again you have got unclean windows.

I:	yes big grimy windows yes.

Lynsey:	That whole area is grimy.  

Anne:	when I read that part I... I absolutely put myself in their position and I am... I can feel anxious.

I:	Really are you feeling it?

Anne:	Hmm. 

Sue:	I mean how many of us remember a time or know of somebody  who wonders when a porter would appear. 

I:	They must be talking about their early childhood, mustn't they, it's not even in their recent memory.

Lynsey:	Because even the thing about the guard I felt that that was an inaccuracy because...

I:	yes there is no guards carriages.

Lynsey:	You don't get guards vans on trains anymore.   Well you get the bit where they put the bikes, but that is not the same as a guard's van.

Liz:	What gets me is if they had say... if it was like up north and they travelled to Liverpool there would be some nosey Scouser saying are you all right love, are you alright do you want ((laughs)).

Sue:	No people don't talk to each other in London. 

Liz:	that's what I mean. They just push past you even though they can see you are in a wheelchair and stuff and it's like, I mean ... I mean like when I have been down to London, and they don't.

I:	They don't [49.29] they push you out of the way.  

[talk together]

I:	What I liked in this bit was the moment where Hope reassured her that she didn't have to describe everything to her, so you don't have to do it all now, just see it first and we will go over it all together, in our own time when we got back I thought that again a bit like the little child was a moment of something emotionally real because I am just thinking about my parents-in-law where erm... you know Sid is dead now but one of the things Sheila says she misses is if they go somewhere if she goes somewhere when she gets back there is no one to talk it over with, how you would go through the day or what happened and that... just that little moment of that feels like that as if part of the joy of the adventure is that they are going to, they are going to go back 

Lynsey:	Afterwards yes,

I:	and they will go over it again and then they will share it. That seemed real.

Anne:	often sort of in hindsight you can enjoy something even more...

I:	Yes you are giving it another go. Erm... 

Anne:	But I also think you know sort of over the guard's van and the... it's erm... when you get older people do treat you differently. I mean I don't... I am not talking about treating, I mean that is a truism isn't it but I mean there is a different response when you are... there is a different response to me when I have got my walking stick, and when I haven't. There is a different response and people do respond differently. And erm... so, I don't want to be brought scones or anything or but erm... 

Liz:	But people actually if they can see something the average person will try and help in what way they can think of at the time, even if it may not be  the most suitable it's what they think of at the time when they know that they think that they should do something and they can't just ignore you know...

I:	Someone who needs some help do you mean?

Liz:	Yes

I:	But do you find that when you are going about I mean do people mainly think oh she has got dark glasses she must have bad eyesight or she needs my help or, do you think they do?

Liz:	I have actually sat down on the train floor, before now because I haven't been able to been given a seat or anything because I have struggled to stand for long periods of time and no one batted an eyelid.

I:	No one took any notice.

Liz:	If I was with a walking stick it would... 

I:	It would be easier.

Liz:	It would be come and sit down love you know. 

I:	Perhaps people don't realise.  

Sue:	There is also [52.09]

I:	When I first started going to London a lot because of The Reader I was really annoyed and disturbed that sometimes young people on the tube would give me their seat. I kept wanting to sort of say I am not old, you don't need to do this.  

Sue:	So people did offer?

I:	Yes not all the time but occasionally. I find it annoying.

Liz:	I was going to say but I mean... I was going to say probably being polite.

I:	Yes they are but it was that I didn't realise I looked like an old person who needed a seat. 

Anne:	Oh any of us, even when we are in our... even when we were in our late 20s, or early 30s when you are younger you know... you are old aren't you.  It's relative. It's relative.

I:	Alright well would someone else carry on I don't know if you would like to Lindsey or if...

Lynsey:	Yes... the taxi driver was surly and reluctant lifting the chair into the black cab while Hope steadied me, I am not as slim as I was and it was almost too much for her but we managed.  How about lunch I suggested, too brightly to take away the sour taste of the driver's expression. Hope nodded. Anywhere that doesn't do rice pudding she said dryly.  Is Fortnum and Mason's still there I asked the driver, yes darling and the British Museum he said, revving his engine impatiently.  Best place for you two I thought I heard him mutter.  Unexpectedly Hope chuckled maybe will go there next she suggested meekly.  That set me off as well. The driver gave us both a suspicious glance and set off still muttering. There are some places which can survive anything, Fortnum's is one of these. A little antechamber of heaven glittering with sunken treasures.  When all civilisations have collapsed Fortnum's will still be there with this genteel doormen and glass chandeliers, the last untouchable, legendary defender of the faith.  We entered on the first floor through mountains of chocolates and cohorts of candied fruits, the air was cool and creamy with vanilla and all spice and peach.  Hope turned her head gently from side to side, breathing in the perfume.  There were truffles and caviar and foie gras in tiny tins, and giant demijohns of green plumbs in aged brandy and cherries the colour... the cherries the colour of my Knightsbridge shoes. There were quails eggs and nougatines and langues de chat, in rice paper packets and champagne bottles in gleaming battalions. We took the lift to the top floor in the cafe where Hope and I drank earl grey from china tubs... sorry we took the lift to the top floor  in the cafe where Hope and I drank early grey from china cups remembering the Meadowbank homes plastic tea service and giggling.  I ordered recklessly for both of us trying not to think of my diminishing savings.  Smoked salmon and scrambled eggs on muffins, light as puffs as air... of air. Tiny canapés of rolled anchovy and sundried tomatoes, Palma ham with slices of pink melon, apricot and chocolate parfait like a delicate caress.  If heaven is anything like as nice as this, murmured Hope  send me right there now. 

((laughs))

I:	I like your voices.  

Lynsey:	Its reading to my son all the time, I just

[talk over each other]

Lynsey:	I am reading this like I am reading the Gruffalo or something.  Should I carry on to the bottom?

I:	Yes go on.

Lynsey:	Even the obligatory bathroom stop was a revelation.  Clean, gleaming tiles, flowers, fluffy pink towels, scented hand cream, perfume I sprayed Hope with freesias and looked at us both in one of the big shiny mirrors.  I had expected us to look drab, maybe even a little foolish in our nursing home cardis and sensible skirts, maybe we did, but to me we looked changed, gilded for the first time I could see Hope as she must have been. I could see myself.  We spent a long time in Fortnum's we visited floors of hats and scarves and handbags and dresses, I imprinted them all into my memory to bring out later with Hope.  She wheeled me patiently through forests of  ling-ery [not said as lingerie] and coats and evening frocks like a breath of summer air, letting her thin elegant fingers trail over silks and furs. Reluctantly we left, the streets were marvellous, but lacked sparkle. Looking at all the people rushing past us, haughty or indifferent once again I was almost afraid. We hailed a taxi.  I was getting nervous now, a prickle of stage fright ran up my spine and I unfolded the paper again, its fold whitened by much handling. Once more I felt drab and old what if the shop assistant wouldn't let me in, what if they laughed at me.  Worse sill... worse still was the suspicion, the certainty that the shoes would be too expensive, that I had already overspent, that maybe I hadn't even had enough to begin with.  Spotting a bookshop, glad of the diversion I stopped the cab and with the help of the driver, we got out and bought Hope a copy of Lolita.  No one said it might be unsuitable.  Hope smiled and held the book running her fingers over the smooth, broken spine.  How good it smells she said softly I had almost forgotten... the cab driver a black man with long hair, grinned at us, he was obviously enjoying himself.  Where to now ladies. I could not answer him, my hands trembled as I handed over the magazine page with the Knightsbridge address. If he had laughed  I think I would have wept.  I was close to it already but the driver just grinned again and drove off into the blaring traffic.  

I:	Ok let's stop there.  Lovely thank you.

Liz:	There is like a difference between this taxi driver and the first one.

I:	yes, yes

Liz:	it's like amazing.  

I:	Yes. I remember going with my colleague Kate McDonald to London, erm... the first time I went with her to London, and erm... she uses a wheelchair. The taxi driver was really, really rude to us, really rude.  It is amazing you know that that could still be the case. 

Lynsey:	Real miseries some of them. 

I:	You know, do I have to get the ramp out.

Lynsey:	Oh really.

I:	Yes.  

Sue:	My dad I don't know if it's different if you are a man but my dad, I can't remember what happened but one time he had to use a taxi and he wasn't able...  his level of paralysis was quite high so he wasn't able to get out of the wheelchair so he had to spend the whole journey with his head like this, with this head bent under the... 

I:	Yes hard isn't it the getting about. It's a funny mixture of thinking of erm... what you were saying earlier Lindsey there is a funny mixture I think the story of almost like fantasy erm... and then these odd little nuggets of quite hard reality, in it.  Erm... that moment where they looked at each other, where she looked at both of them in the mirror that seemed funny because that is like, I looked at both of us, knowing that the other one is blind and it just seemed a, a moment of I don't know something good in that. Erm...

Anne:	It reminds me of...

I:	Let me just read it sorry. Every obligatory bathroom stop was... even the obligatory bathroom stop was a revelation. Clean gleaming tiles, flowers, fluffy pink towels, scented hand cream, perfume I sprayed Hope with freesias and looked at us and looked at us both, in one of the big shiny mirrors.  I had expected us to look drab maybe even a little foolish in our nursing home cardis and sensible skirts, maybe we did but to me, we looked changed, gilded. For the first time I could see Hope as she must have been. I could see myself and I wondered whether that was because, because they are doing something, they are... because they are not just in the nursing home, even though they look the same, they are wearing still the same clothes, they are in a different context, a completely different context.

Anne:	It's... it... I have had years and years of being unable to leave the house, and when I finally could go into London and at the time you could only, I could only go to the hotel with my mum and dad, and I couldn't go along the road, and yet I... it's that kind of experience that sort of, everybody else experiences it all the time, because they can all do it, but when you can't do it, like they can't do it because of... then it becomes, the degree of pleasure and  erm... it just, it is just astounding.  The... it is impossible to describe when you haven't been able to do something ever and then you can, even... even though everywhere else is still dangerous but that, I absolutely see it you know. 

I:	So when we are reading it, are you kind of 

Anne:	I am identifying with it.

I:	Completely?

Anne:	((laughs)) Yes.

Sue:	why does she use the word gilded because I feel as though that is something that you do to an exterior of something isn't it and I feel as though we are seeing their inner selves. 

Lynsey:	Probably feeling more sort of radiant and she feels like they are looking radiant.

Sue:	Yes, 

Anne:	But you see the reason why it could be gilded

	[01.01.59]

Anne:	It doesn't... because she can do it doesn't mean to say you can do everything.  But you can just be there at that time, even just going to a particularly posh loo, you know you can do... and although your life is still the same, nothing is fundamentally changed all the same problems are still there. For that short time, and it is gilded because it's only temporary, it's only a covering but you still have it.

I:	Fleeting. And we often use the word gilded as gilded youth.  That's...

Lynsey:	Yes, [01.02.36]

I:	that is a phrase isn't it, you know as if it's just like a fleeting goldiness that is on young people, so in a way lovely to have the word gilded there, even though you are partly thinking oh Fortnum and Mason's you know, you spent all your money you idiots, etc, but... but you are feeling also that it was like something that was coming out of them as well that's... that's true isn't it, it is something.  I don't know what I was most struck by the feeling that 2 of them were visible in the mirror but only one of them could see it, something about that I don't know either bothers me or interests me. I looked at both of us, 

?	Hmm, hmm

I:	I don't know why.  

Anne:	And I thought erm...  there was a certain amount of remembrance in the fact they went straight up to the cafe, it was... it was as if they knew that they had been to the cafe in their past before, they knew where it was, they went straight up to it, it wasn't a case of where is the cafe... 

I:	Or is there a cafe... I didn't know...

Anne:	They went there [talk together] [01.03.41]

Sue:	Yes there was no confusion they were like straight...

I:	[talk over] yes, yes, yes.  That is interesting.

Liz:	I was going to say you are comparing it to the station which, most stations are bad enough for anyone.  

I:	Yes this is very different.  Erm... ok. Liz would you like to read a bit?

Liz:	That's alright.

I:	Ok.  Where were we... 

Lynsey:	Does anyone want a drink I am just going to make a cuppa.

I:	Can I just have a [01.04.11] hot water thanks.  Erm... 

Liz:	We are onto the next page 420.

I:	Oh right.

Sue:	where to now ladies.  

I:	Oh yes it was a tiny shop, 420 top of the page? Oh now where to now ladies, yes. I could not answer him my hands trembled as I handed over the magazine page with the Knightsbridge address. If he had laughed I think I would have wept I was close to it already but the driver just grinned again and drove off into the blaring traffic.  It was a tiny shop, with a single window with glass display shelves, and a single pair of shoes on each. So... Mike you don't know about this but the ladies in the room, will know.

((laughs))

Liz:	That means they will be...

I:	They are very, very expensive. 

Sue:	there will be no prices on them.  

I:	Behind him I could see a light... behind them I could see a light interior all pale wood and glass with tall vases of white roses on the floor.  Stop I told Hope, what's wrong is it shut? No, the shop was empty, I could see that. There was one assistant a young man in black with long clean hair, the shoes in the window were pale green, tiny like buds just about to open, there were no prices on any of them. Onwards urged Hope in her Cambridge voice.  I can't... it's... I couldn't finish I saw myself again, old and colourless, untouched by magic. Unsuitable barked Hope scornfully, and wheeled me in anyway.  For a second I thought she was going to hit the vase of roses  by the door, left I yelled and we just missed... we missed them just. The young man looked at us curiously, he had a clever handsome face, and I was relieved to see that his eyes were smiling.  I held up the picture... we will stop there because that makes me think about the people in the home, where clever or stupid, thick, or whatever they were, it is as if she does seem to think in those terms doesn't she. But what she is picking out as well as clever and handsome which you might think in a different story could be good things, but in this story might be bad things and yet she picks out also I was relieved to see that his eyes were smiling as if she has no need to be afraid of a clever, handsome person.

Liz:	I suppose it's a bit like that I mean... they got like clever and handsome which are quite surface type of things and of you know and like back in the nursing home 

I:	Old beige, 

Liz:	there has been nothing which has shone out in a way when because his eyes were smiling because they do say the eyes are the entrance to the soul in a sense and you erm...

I:	so reassuring to have that smile. 

Anne:	I thought two things I thought the shop, you know sort of it shows the quality of the shop, the high quality of the shop that it should have vases on the floor, which is I mean... you can do that when it's of such high quality.

I:	And the vases presumably are very large, the roses are very large and so on.

Liz:	I was just thinking this is going to be a very expensive trip if you knock anything off ((laughs))

I:	but that horrible feeling of going in a shop like that, if you have ever been in one where you suddenly start thinking...

Liz:	Don't want to touch anything.

I:	I am going to break something, even as a competent adult you feel that or I definitely know I shouldn't be in here, this shop keeper knows I haven't got enough money, have you ever had that...

Liz:	Yes, definitely, definitely.

Anne:	I think it's wonderful that she falters but there is somebody there to give her the support which even though it was something she really wanted, and you know this was what the trip was about, she faltered because of just the whole experience, and yet there was somebody who could go beyond that and take her into it, to get her over that threshold.

Liz:	I was going to say I wonder whether erm... Hope's blindness is actually working in their favour in that sense because she can't see how... how...

I:	Oh that's a good point.  

Lynsey:	Yes

Liz:	How posh it is when Faith can, and she can see and she is thinking oh gosh, but Hope can't see that.

Lynsey:	Or just not care, she might just not care.  

I:	Unsuitable barked Hope scornfully, whatever...

Liz:	But she hasn't got that visual.

I:	Yes so she hasn't got that and she might not, as a Cambridge Professor who is probably thinking of some of the powerful old ladies my husband knew when he was the first man in Girton, he was the first male student admitted to Girton and...

Lynsey:	Was it a ladies college?

I:	Yes it was completely  ladies. And they had all been there since about 1920 and they were all desperately powerful...

Lynsey:	All the Professors?

I:	All the old ladies, really posh obviously and really, really powerful erm... so erm... I don't know why I started saying that but just think erm... they might not be at all intimidated to go into a very posh shop in Knightsbridge or somewhere erm... presumably and she... but the fact that she can't see it, and the fact that she can't see the roses, and she can't see the tiny amount of shoes and the no prices, must make it easier.

Liz:	I mean just because if you know if you can see something it is going to be an extra challenge to you, in that sense.

Anne:	I don't... I think she would have felt the same no matter what, whether it was an inexpensive shop because it meant so much to her, that I think...

I:	So it's more about the word unsuitable, it's like we are going to do something unsuitable. Whatever it is, we have got Lolita, we have been to Fortnum and Mason's and...

Anne:	[talk over] I noticed she has got, she wanted Lolita but she is blind.  

I:	Yes it was lovely, we missed that bit where she smelt it.

Sue:	The smell

I:	The smell of a new book.

Sue:	And the smell in Fortnum's as well.  Because what must it smell like I mean it might be  a home that smells ok.

I:	But mainly homes don't smell ok. 

Lynsey:	It's like we say though it could just even if it smells you know clean or whatever, it will still smell like an institution.

Anne:	Pastel detergent that is what it was described as, pastel detergent.

Liz:	It got like detergent versus the perfume type of situation.

I:	Yes  so they are having an overwhelmingly powerful experience, aren't they.

Anne:	So much perfume can give you a headache ((laughs))

Liz:	I don't think the posh side of it [01.11.02]

[laughs]

Anne:	I mean how many of our...

I:	Sometimes this group does divide down gender lines which is unfortunate for Mike, who is the only guy here.

Anne:	How many... the description of Fortnum, how many actually felt the luxury of it, or the amazingness of it or did you feel a bit headachy when you read it?

Liz:	I was [01.11.31]

Lynsey:	Yes it's too much but that's what ... but the thing is you have got to have been in the shop to know, well I feel like I feel like it's not so well described that you know exactly what it's like without having been in there, but I don't know if it's because I have been in there, so I think oh yes, yes I know what you are talking about. But... I am not sure if I would be aware.

Liz:	I can think of certain similar place, I can think of a similar place in Chester which my mom has taken me and it's... it's... it's always with my mom really sees it as quite special and what not, it isn't really my cup of tea, personally I find the whole...

I:	Do you think when we are reading, when we read something like that description of Fortnum's if you haven't been to Fortnum's do you think what we do is rifle through things we do know so remember George Henry Lees when I was a child, or erm... do you remember Sue you might remember... Henderson's, or Cripps of Bold Street.

Anne:	I remember Henderson's.

I:	Do you remember Cripps of Bold Street. 

Sue:	I worked at the bottom of Bold Street, Bold Street was the... my mother used to dress us, we always had Sunday clothes then and you would go to town on a Sunday when the shops were closed, to walk up Bold Street and window shop.

Lynsey:	Just to promenade?

Sue:	Watches of Switzerland, erm... oh Cardoma coffee bar it was beautiful.

Lynsey:	It was quite posh then?

I:	Yes it was posh.  Bold Street was very, very posh. Very posh.

Sue:	Posh street, oh yes. But that description reminds me of going to Harrods and it also reminds me of Cooper's food hall but if you haven't been to those places.

I:	So you are rifling things you can remember, 

Sue:	Yes, yes

I:	and you are.

Lynsey:	Definitely.

I:	So do you think when we are reading things is that what we do, is it you don't, you know so you don't know a thing that they are telling you about but you go through all your own memories or experiences, to try and almost like match them up?

Anne:	Understand... yes I think that's true.

I:	You overlay them in some way. And does that matter so if you couldn't really recreate Fortnum's does it matter?

Lynsey:	Well I still think, I still... I do think it depends on how well it's written because I think something that is extraordinary well written you don't have to have had that experience, it will pinpoint through the specifics, through the specifics it will pinpoint something universal. Whereas I just think she is describing Fortnum's and expecting you to know what she is talking about. 

((laughs))

Sue:	None of us have been in a place like Silas Marner was in have we but did anybody...

[talk together]

Sue:	curls and...

I:	You are really trying to make an argument here for quality aren't you?  

((laughs))

I:	I am trying to retain a neutral position here, while we get to the end of this story.  Erm... ok, where were we then erm... someone remind me?

Liz:	the young man he had a clever handsome face but...

I:	Ok thank you.  I held up the picture I would like to see a pair of these I told him trying to copy Hope's imperious tone, but sounding old and quavery instead. Size 4.  His eyes widened a little but he did not comment, instead he turned and went into the back of the shop where I could see shelves of boxes waiting. I closed my eyes.  I thought I had a pair left...

Anne:	Oh dear

I:	He was carrying them...

Anne:	what if she had gone there and they hadn't got them in their size.  ((laughs))

I:	He was carrying them, carefully all sucked, sweet, shiny and red, red, red.  Let me see them please, they were like Christmas baubles. Like rubies. Like impossible fruit. Would you like to try them on?  He did not comment on my wheelchair, my old and lumpy feet in their porridge coloured slip-ons instead he knelt in front of me, his dark hair falling around his face, gently he removed my shoes. I know he could see the veins worming up my ankles and smell the violent... violet scent of the talc which Hope rubs into my feet at bedtime, with great care he slipped the shoes onto my feet. I felt my arches push up alarmingly as the shoe slid into place. May I show you. Carefully he stretched out my leg, so that I could see. Ginger Rogers whispered Hope shoes for strutting, sashaying, striding, soaring anything but walking. I looked at myself for a long time, fists clenched a hot fierce sweetness in my heart.  I wondered what Tom would say if he saw me now. My head was spinning.

Liz:	Who is Tom sorry?

I:	her son is it?

Lynsey:	Hmm. The one who visits once a fortnight.

I:	Yes that's right.   Brings her crysanths.

Anne:	I hoped it was a...

I:	 A lover.

Anne:	Yes her late husband. 

I:	How much I asked hoarsely. The young man told me a price so staggering that at first I was sure I had misheard. More than I had paid for my first house. I felt the knowledge clang deep at my insides like something falling down a well. I am sorry I heard myself saying from a distance, that is a little too dear.  From his expression I guessed he might have been expecting it. Oh Faith said Hope softly, it's alright I told them both they didn't really suit me.  The young man shook his head, you are wrong madam he told me with a crooked smile, I think they did.  Gently he put the shoes, valentine, racing car, candy apple red, back into their box. The room light as it was seemed a little duller when they had gone. Are you just here for the day madam, I nodded yes, we have enjoyed ourselves very much and now it's time to go home.  I am sorry, he reached over to one of the tall vases, by the door, and removed a rose, perhaps you would like one of these he put it into my hand, it was perfect, highly scented, barely open, it smelt of summer evenings and  Swan Lake. In that moment I forgot all about the red shoes, a man, one who was not my son, had offered me flowers.  I still have the white rose, I put it in a paper cup of water for the train journey home, and then transferred it to a vase. The yellow crysanths were finished anyway.  When it fades I will press the petals, which are still unusually scented, and use them to mark the pages of Lolita which Hope and I are reading. Unsuitable it may be, but I would like to see them try to take it away.  

Liz:	I want to know what the home's reaction was when they arrived back ((laughs)).

Sue:	It doesn't matter, they had done it.  It is very tender isn't it? 

Anne:	It is really.

Liz:	I am not sure...

[talk together]

Liz:	The way the shop assistant gave her a rose, yes.

Sue:	I think it's beautiful.  

I:	A shop assistant could be kind to you. It's possible.

Sue: 	I worked in a shoe shop.   Honestly I think I have done very job,  I haven't worked in a pub, I couldn't have coped with that and it... it is awful when you are trying to fit shoes or slippers or whatever, it was a low end market on big lumpy feet, which my [01.19.29]

Lynsey:	Bunions and...

Sue:	Yes but the manageress who could be quite a harsh character at times was so lovely with all the old people who came in, she was so lovely with them.

Anne:	I felt this man, this shop assistant was at his ordinary day or whatever, come in whatever, and suddenly he was having an experience you know and he realised it and he... he... it was an experience for him as well. And, 

I:	These two old ladies come in and he treats them kindly.

Anne:	Well it was... it was... it was... I mean for him... I don't think it's just the word kindly, I think he realised, he... and he didn't, you know he absolutely was unfaltering you know it was... it was...

I:	I thought it was a bit sort of fairytale like at that point, where...

Anne:	Yes, Cinderella. 

I:	Yes, yes.

Sue:	She didn't try them both on, did she try them both on or was it just the one?

I:	No it was just the one yes, it was. 

Lynsey:	No, no, no, he slipped the shoes on to my feet.

I:	Oh right he slipped the shoes on ok.

Sue:	That's fine, because I was thinking to myself you are always say would you like to try the other one.

Anne:	but what she got... wasn't the shoes, what she wanted of the shoes was to be a woman again, an attractive, sexy woman and she got that, with the rose.

I:	Yes just for a moment.

Sue:	Yes, yes.

Anne:	she got that and she was able to keep that. 

[talk together]

Lynsey:	[01.21.07]

Anne:	When she had it earlier probably she didn't have it, or she didn't realise what she had when she was younger, when you know you just live day to day, but now she realised and she... she didn't press roses of the past she was going to press this one.  It was [01.21.25]

I:	[talk over] do you think there is a difference between a young experience and an old one, like when you were young if you just had something for a day or just one half of an experience like that, you might be feeling disappointed but if you were old, you could be really glad of one small experience. Is that partly because they will go back now and talk about it for months, which they will erm... is it something to do with the difference in time or...

Liz:	I think if you... you know and if that was like a normal experience for you, you wouldn't think anything of it, but for those who going into this really posh where the shoes are so stupidly expensive you know, it doesn't matter that they have gone from a nursing home, the fact it could be anyone coming from a totally outside environment to that particular ... it's a totally different experience they are going to.

I:	I have had experiences like that with our apprentices at The Reader who... you know to a man and woman have really had very, very little experience of the world in any way whatsoever, so going on a train to London, you know quite a big experience for 2 of them, to go on a train.

Lynsey:	It's the context in which you have had experiences I think makes a massive real difference.

Anne:	I think these two are having the experience because they are still reading Lolita and I would like to see them try to take it away, so it isn't... that was it and now they just die, it's...

I:	Yes they have got the book...

Anne:	... you know

I:	And got flowers.

Lynsey:	It's funny  though, because even here I am thinking you know that could be sort of defiant she is saying I would like to see somebody take it away, but I don't know if it's me, maybe just I have got a problem but ((laughs)) maybe it's my issues... but it could sound defiant and strong and that but to me it just sounds really snide.  I would like to see them take that away, like that I don't know I... I can't get over this thought of them being quite snarky and snide...

Sue:	You don't like them do you?

((laughs))

Anne:	You won't be withdrawing this book from the library.  ((laughs)).

Sue:	You need to meet my friend... but then you might not like her either!

Lynsey: 	I am sure they are lovely, I am sure they are lovely. ((laughs)) it's funny in spite of you know, in spite of you know sort of knowing... you know like the magic of a pair of shoes, because she talks about pale green tiny buds about to open, and the shoes I bought to get married in were pale green tiny shoes, that I got married in and they cost a lot of money and I still, you know I still think about those shoes they are a bit... you know they are a bit worn now but they are amazing shoes and I am so glad that I did them... I am so glad that I bought them at the time, and paid all that money for them because they were sort of worth more than the money, but erm... I don't know...

I:	Because of their loveliness you mean?

Lynsey:	Yes because... because... partly because of their loveliness and partly because of the... the sort of once in a lifetime extravagance of it you know, I mean they weren't like... because I remember how much I can remember how much they cost, they cost £165...

I:	Shhoo

Lynsey:	Which is yes, yes, I know but it was...

((laughs))

Lynsey:	It was my wedding. 

I:	Yes of course it was.

Lynsey:	And erm... you know.

I:	I just really want to ask Mike, whether there is anything like this for men?

Mike:	Like what?

I:	Like this experience with the shoes, you know would that be like saying I am going to get a cup final ticket come hell or high water even if it cost me £300.  

Anne:	Or go to the cup final, or try and go to the...

Liz:	I was going to say...

I:	Is there?

Mike:	Kind of reminds me of a film where the guy who goes round to see this blind woman on Christmas Day and he takes her a chicken and erm... it's a bit like that, [01.25.16] I can't remember what it's called now.  I think it's called snow or something like that, it's about... it's a little bit like this, quite sentimental, in a way but it's still quite touching and...

Liz:	Can I just say...

I:	Go on let Liz say yes.

Liz:	I mean... I mean I know, I know for my... I know my dad and also my granddad to some extent as well as [01.25.48]  I don't know if you know erm... it is the panoramic...

I:	Restaurant.

Liz:	Restaurant in [01.25.56] and you know, and it's like silver service and you know and you get told off if you are passing a plate because trust me I have got told off by them, but like my dad and my granddad see that as... as it's like, it's like... it's that... it's that pair of shoes, 

Lynsey:	The experience.

Liz:	I am like... I mean my brother is pretty much similar to me that he got this... we both tend to think where is the rest of it ((laughs)) you know... he is like, di, di, di, finished but like to my dad and you know and my godfather very much and he is very into the whole you know the service as it were, the whole experience you know and like glasses which aren't supposed to drunk out of ((laughs)) you can probably tell, you can probably tell my views on it... 

I:	What do you think those things are then loving something like that or, loving the shoes or it's a one-off or, erm... why do we want them?

Anne:	It's... it's... it's an immense pleasure of... of... of everything of that moment, it's... it's... it isn't so much the shoes, it's... or the service there is something, there are other things going on that makes it... it stands out as valuable. 

Lynsey:	It's sensual, it's a sensual experience and it's a sensory experience.

Anne:	[talk over] yes.  

Liz:	It's like an art type of experience in a sense that even a service can be...

I:	beautiful

Liz:	beautiful.

Lynsey:	Exactly tender you know, you feel the sense of..

Anne:	emotions heightened and...

I:	so it's like... 

Lynsey:	There is that feeling of... there is actually a word for it, I don't know if psychologists would actually know what the word for it is, but there is a feeling that you get when you are totally absorbed by something or you are watching somebody do something very, very tenderly and carefully and you get that sort of a prickling sensation...

Anne:	Yes, yes... yes.

Lynsey:	over your entire scalp and going down to your neck.  

Anne:	Yes it's true.

Lynsey:	And it's, it is a sort of a total... a total sensual experience and it's got a name I can't remember.

I:	[talk over] Wow

Sue:	[talk over] It's not homeostasis is it where everything is perfect and balanced,  I think that's more when you are lost in something.

Lynsey:	Yes... well that sort of feeling of floating, no it has got a name I only found it out a couple of weeks ago but I thought oh I know that feeling.

I:	Had it, had it...

Liz:	I think we are so used to being treated rudely and you know like typical London.

I:	Roughly

Liz:	Yes that we lose track of...

Lynsey:	It's getting in touch with the sublime isn't it.

Liz:	Yes, I mean the two are very much extremes and sometimes it's just nice to not have the... so you know you don't need to have service

I:	[talk over] it's a lovely thought to imagine...

Liz:	[talk over] or the two extremes that you have got the London, yes... chaos and you have got this ...

I:	[talk over] Tiny shop where, where something perfect has happened. It is like art or a religious experience. Or something like that.

Anne:	[talk over] when I... because to go out... you can go out, I didn't see why she had... would have... I was trying to think to myself to say to her, don't worry if you can't afford it because it is feeding your soul, and when I... when I go sort of out window shopping and I get that feeling, it's feeding my soul and that's you know...

I:	And that will do.

Anne:	Feeding my... you know and it doesn't matter.

Liz:	I mean I found in just to go into say the like of Kirk Geiger it's like looking at modern art, more than going round the Tate I am sorry... sorry if you like modern art but ((laughs)).

Anne:	Can I bring this down to earth a bit though because I think this shop assistant in that kind of shop, will be used to people coming in, the advert appeared in the press, he will be used to people who can't afford it so, whether this was an experience which he was familiar with because there would have been people who...

I:	I don't know you know because I know... because if you think of some of those shops they do have the look of places that you hardly dare go into.

Anne:	But you can go...

I:	You can go, I know you can but...

Anne:	It doesn't... you know some of the shops, because I haven't been to the Liverpool One part because I daren't, 

((laughs))

Anne:	No I physically daren't but the little parts of it sort of, back at Bluecoat there are shops there, and you get... they are surprisingly nice to you, I mean I go in and I look an utter mess and an utter frump and absolutely awful and they are surprisingly, and I am always stunned at how nice they are because you always think they would be immediately sort of completely you know, reading the situation but they don't, and it surprises how nice they can be.  I mean I always say I am window shopping.

I:	Perhaps they get special training nowadays but I still think some of those London shops... is it time for you to go, oh I know you have got to do your form but I wanted to try and get the poem done before you go today but we are not able to are we, but we do want to go onto the poem.

Liz:	I just wanted to... the fact they can be really nice and stuff and somewhere that is the total opposite say if you go into Primark or Matalan you know but there was one time where I had actually thought, I don't know if you know the Met Quarter at all, the posh shops in there and I had actually bought a coffee and I ended up burning my hand with the coffee and I was going past was it Hobbs or something, and they were really helpful they actually looked after me and you know it was all... I mean no chance was I going to buy anything in there, it wasn't like I was a potential customer or anything, ((laughs)) you know and I just... 

I:	There can be kindness everywhere but there could have been kindness in the old people's home, it just didn't seem as if, apart from that guy was it Chris who did the windows, it just didn't seem as if there was much of it.

[talk over]

I:	Let's go on and read the poem while Anne is still in the room.  When you are old.

	When you are old and grey and full of sleep and nodding by the fire, take down this book and slowly read and dream of the soft look your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep.  How many loved your moments of glad grace, and loved your beauty with love false or true.  But one man loved the pilgrim's soul in you, and loved the sorrows of your changing face.  And bending down beside the glowing bars, murmur a little sadly how love fled and paced upon the mountains overhead, and hid his face amid a crowd of stars.  

Anne:	Thank you.

I:	Won't see you next time but I will see you at the end of the whole...

Anne:	thank you very much.

I:	And we will carry on with the group on Fridays after the research is over so... see you again.

Anne:	Bye everyone.  

I:	Shall I read it again. When you are old.

	When you are old and grey and full of sleep and nodding by the fire. Take down this book and slowly read and dream of the soft look your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep.  How many loved your moments of glad grace, and loved your beauty with love false or true.  But one man loved the pilgrim soul in you, and loved the sorrows of your changing face.  And bending down beside the glowing bars murmur a little sadly, how love fled and paced upon the mountains overhead, and hid his face amid a crowd of stars. 

Liz:	I am assuming, assuming that her husband has died before, you know and she is you know... 

I:	I don't know.

Liz:	You have got like one man loved the pilgrim soul in you, loved the sorrows of your changed face that sounds like two old people growing old together, but when it says how love fled and  hid his face amid a crowd of stars it sounds like he has gone before her.  

I:	Yes, and yet it could... it could be a poem to a young person because of the way  it begins, when you are old and grey and full sleep and nodding by the fire.  It's a very... there is lots of... I feel as if there is lots of different time bands in the poem. Erm... and also, more... I feel it's more confusing than it seems when you first read it, it seems straight forward but it is more confusing than that. 

Liz:	it could be that like an old person is telling the young person this and you know that this is what you have got to look forward to ((laughs)).

I:	Certainly in the opening line it feels like that, or the opening lines but when you are old and grey and full of sleep and nodding by the fire, take down this book and slowly read and dream of the soft look your eyes had once and of their shadows deep.  There are time bands in it, there is a future when.  And you imagine that, it  becomes very present, if this was... I don't know if you do this but I, usually have a sort of, like a film in my mind when I am reading a poem and different things come into the film so, I do see an old person by a fire, but also I see the young person who someone is giving a book to, take down this book as if you know if I was saying that to you now, when you are old and grey and full of steam take down this book it's like a... a gift to somebody who is younger and may not understand the book or just will have it up on the shelf for years or.

Liz:	It's like because in the story you have got the young and old type of how people... well pretty much judge each other in a sense and it's like, it's like you have got that sort of old, you know... you know to be young here as well.

I:	I don't know whether the old, whether the person who is giving the book is old, I don't think you can tell can you because...

Sue:	I think that's an explanation. This is how I felt.  I mean I know...

I:	when I was young you mean?

Sue:	He did love somebody who didn't love him back didn't he so I don't know...

I:	Who did?

Sue:	sorry Yeats

I:	 I don't know.

Sue:	[talk over] That's  in my mind, in the back of my mind I don't know I can't help thinking of it. 

I:	Stay with the poems.

Sue:	What I am interested in is the loved the sorrows of your changing face because at first I thought it was changing because of age but now I am wondering if it is changing because of... happiness, sorrow, whatever emotion

I:	[talk over] experience

Sue:	 was happening at the time.  

I:	The amount of time it takes place it might be short but you face would or could change.

Sue:	Yes.  

I:	Read it again, let's read it again. Mike would you start again would you read again?

Mike:	When you are old and grey and full of sleep, and nodding by the fire, take down this book and slowly read and dream of the soft look your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep.  How many loved your moments of glad grace and loved your beauty and with love false or true, but one man loved the pilgrim soul in you, and loved the  sorrows of your changing face.  Bending down the beside the glowing bars, murmur a little sadly how love fled and paced upon the mountains overhead and hid his face amid a crowd of stars.

I:	Hmm.  Thank you.  Pick a bit Lynsey that you are interested in or troubled by or...

Lynsey:	It's funny. I am having really trouble sort of erm...  I don't know, sort of erm...  you know sort of getting it really,  just getting it, it's funny I don't know if it's because, you know you can see it is by Yeats but, but erm... for some reason I keep thinking it can't because he is talking about the glowing bars when I think of glowing bars I think of electric fire, and I think electric fires can't have been invented when Yeats was writing that is the only thing I can think of ((laughs)) actually but he might be talking about glowing bars in the sense that they might be bars in front of a coal or log fire.

I:	yes it will be, it will be like one of those iron grates.

Lynsey:	Grates, yes I know exactly so I think my erm... my brain has got completely fixated on... ((laughs))

I:	Is this a realistic detail or not.  Mike, say a bit you like or are you interested in, in it?

Mike:	Yes I can relate to the nodding by the fire, that is Christmas sort of thing isn't it? Light a fire at Christmas and you are sort of thinking back of all the years gone by. It's kind of like that sort of...

I:	It's that feeling.

Mike:	Warm, remembrances.

I:	but it's funny, it's almost as if the poem is imaging that in the future, you know if you think of erm... people you have loved or people you know, or you know think of your little chap Lindsey and thinking sort of, imagine him when he is old, you know erm... that would... it's a funny 

Lynsey:	Yes

I:	Feeling isn't it, to think there is this huge sort of future ahead of us.

Lynsey:	Expanse of time, well you hope it's an expanse of time, what you know really is that it will feel like about 5 minutes.

I:	Yes and suddenly we will be in it really, really quickly. Erm... and... would you want to remember to bring back when you slowly read, erm... the dream of the soft look your eyes had once it's as if... he is asking the person who he is giving the book to, or the poem to, but to remember yourself, that is funny it's  not like remember me, when you are old, it's like when you are old and grey and full of sleep and nodding by the fire, take down this book and slowly read, and dream of the soft look, not that I looked at you with, but your eyes had once. And that is, you can see why Angie has put that with this story because it is a bit erm... and whatever you think of the quality, the literary quality of the story, the actual nub of the idea of two people, not trying to regain their youth but just trying to feel some feelings they used to have or...

Lynsey:	It was having a sense of living in the moment rather than living in the past isn't it?

I:	Yes, yes.  

Lynsey:	Yes that's funny... I wonder if that is the difficulty I am having with it really is to dream of the soft look your eyes had once, and erm...  I don't know it's almost encouraging erm... the poem is sort of encouraging you to feel melancholy really isn't it and encouraging you possibly to feel regretful that it's gone so it's got a sort of erm... 

I:	Yes it's possibly, both of those I think it is, and yet it doesn't... I think some of the lines seem like that, and yet other lines like how many loved your moments of glad grace, seems to have joy in it, but if you are only having that as a memory, is that sad.

Lynsey:	Yes I think if... if that line had been how many have loved, how many have loved your moments of glad grace and have loved your beauty, rather than how many loved your moments, loved your beauty it would sound less... less erm... you know it would have less of a sense of regret I think. I think it would erm... feel a lot more celebratory because you would be looking back thinking like you know... because ((laughs)) I read the little notes afterwards you see and somebody says this poem made Amy feel sad, so much is behind you she said it's amazing. When asked why she said amazing, she said because I say to myself what does that mean did I really do all those things, amazing and if you can reflect on you know how many people have loved you and how much you have enjoyed it feels a lot more active, than saying loved you, it feels a lot more [01.44.19]

I:	[talk over] so it's just like in the absolute past tense it is over. 

Lynsey:	Yes

Liz:	Can I just say because I have recently finished a grammar course with a distance learning thing and it was... in terms of the different past tense, and you know in terms... because that is like because that is past simple and it's literally...

I:	It's over

Liz:	It's over, in the past over finished, when you have got if have loved, which isn't... if you know the term let me know but 

[talk together] [01.44.58]

Liz:	But the whole thing is have, it's kind of linked to the present.  Because have is...

Lynsey:	Yes exactly to have yes.

Liz:	So you have in its and it sort of has a past but linked to the present in a sense, erm... which is, the tense has a name... 

I:	So all those past, absolute simple past tenses, in that middle verse, loved, loved, loved, loved, in each line love as a past tense, maybe building up that feeling of it's...

Liz:	You don't have it anymore.

I:	It's gone, it's over, it's done for erm... yes I believe that and I feel it, I still feel that I am moved by the glad grace, erm... and by loved your beauty with love false or true, and moved by the pilgrim soul, and I am moved by the... it's as if, I appreciate and will take with me into the next time I read it that now a out the absolute past but the things it's... that are done for in those pasts, are still moving to me. So... I don't know how sad I think it is, I don't know. I am changing my mind maybe.

Sue:	It's still there.  

Liz:	I find it's a very... I find it's a very like... I don't think it's a sad poem at all, you because, because I mean... particularly one man loved the pilgrim soul in you and you have got the pilgrim it's... because life is like a pilgrimage, you know...

Sue:	Journey

Liz:	Yes 

I:	But it's still as Lindsey said the verb is loved, and also wonder we will have to get into the last stanza but and bending down beside the glowing bars, murmur a little sadly now why is it only a little sadly.

Sue:	Because it's still there amongst the stars is it.

I:	How love fled and paced up on the mountains overhead, and hid his face amid a crowd of stars.

Sue:	That is a very beautiful image a crowd of stars isn't it? If you are ever lucky enough to be somewhere there is no light pollution.

I:	Yes so it, it is as if the image of the crowd of stars makes you feel... good or raised or happy or something, and yet, it is... the undercurrent is still sad.  Sad, sad.

Sue:	But only a little.

I:	Yes but only, but is that because erm... murmur a little sadly, as if wasn't love very important then finally at the end, erm... or was it just this one man who was not very important you know.

Sue:	Because it fled but then it paced.  I mean pacing that is an interesting...

I:	And hid his face, could that change, if this is really like a 22 year old man writing to a 22 year old girl, erm... it's a rather different story than if it's either you know erm... somebody who feels their life's love has been broken and you will never get it back or...

Sue:	So imagine how it will be when they are  old.

I:	When they are, and when both of them are old maybe.  Erm..., will that love ever, come back, that pacing you are right, and paced, upon the mountains overhead, it sounds a bit violent almost doesn't it?  

Lynsey:	Like a lion

I:	Like lion or thunder or, erm... 

Sue:	Because for most people I mean I have been on a height  erm... of a mountain, well a hill in this country and they are far away aren't they to state the obvious. ((laughs))

I:	Yes shall we have one more reading.  Will someone read it?

Liz:	I will read it.

I:	Thank you.

Liz:	When you are old and grey and full of sleep, and nodding by the fire, take down this book and slowly read and dream of the soft look your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep. How many loved your moments of glad grace and loved your beauty with love false or true. But one man loved the pilgrim soul in you, and loved the souls of your changing face.  And bending down beside the glowing bars, murmur a little sadly how a love fled and paced upon the mountains overhead, and hid his face amid a crowd of stars.

I:	Thank you.  Thanks.  I was struck as you were reading by the middle verse of the relation between the pilgrim soul and the changing face, because... because pilgrim is someone who is on a journey, like the soul is, if the essence of this person is someone who is changing or moving, and loved the sorrows of your changing face.  Erm... it's as if you sort of wander what was it he loved. Erm... and the other people who loved her beauty with love false or true, erm... if you were a young beautiful person, or even just young, in the end isn't it, there is a kind of beauty to that, which erm... you are too young Liz to know about this yet, but when you are older, you start to realise everybody who is young is beautiful they are just beautiful because they are young. 

Liz:	But there is also in terms of you know inner beauty as well you know because you have got like love false or true and sometimes you can actually see radiant beauty coming out of anyone, or even the lack of radiant beauty even if they are physically attractive, there is a lack of something which is... which you would see in a... in erm... in like a beautiful person inside, you know it's...

I:	This beauty feels to me like a very superficial beauty, well like a physical beauty, as if she is just a lovely woman. And some people will love her falsely because of that, not just being in love with the outside of it, and others will do it truly but one man, only one loved something that was not to do with that beauty...

Liz:	but the soul.

I:	Hmm but loved the pilgrim soul.  

Sue:	so saw beyond that facade.

I:	Hmm... so you were saying Sue at the beginning he was in love with somebody who didn't love him back.

Sue:	Yes so I believe anyway. Erm... 

I:	And would you tell this from this poem?

Sue:	Well in a way I wish I hadn't been told that, you know when we were studying him, I did an access course and we studied him then, we were given all this background and so that colours what you read then because you have got that knowledge about it, so I don't know but... I don't know if you would.

Liz:	But also you don't know whether he has written it thinking of his experience or whether he is writing it from an experience to someone else. It's... you know because... only because...

I:	You mean imagining. 

Liz:	Or because you don't know exactly where he has got this idea from it could be linking to his own experiences or it may be another... someone else's story even or something which he has been inspired by it could be that so you can't...

I:	So we wouldn't know anyway.

Liz:	So you don't know.

I:	If we just had the poem to go on, is it a sad love affair? It's ok we will stop.

Sue:	The man is one man and  [01.53.30] it's impersonal isn't it?

I:	We don't even know that it is a woman or anything. All you know is a you.  

Sue:	That's true.

Lynsey:	It's funny you know it's a really long time since I read Yeats but I really used to enjoy him when I was you know, when I was doing it for my A levels, you know I read Yeats for my A levels but, erm... but this one I have never come across it and erm... I am sort of a bit... a bit lost by it actually, I don't know why.

I:	It's hard, it feels moveable, it feels stuff is shifting in it, that's why.

Liz:	I was going to say I mean, because... because he describes like but man loved the pilgrim soul in you, which tends to put a picture of a woman in you know but I often erm... because often the whole superficial beauty side of things tend to be you know, in terms of women that they, you know there is a lot of expectations that you have to look a certain way, and you just need to look at all these magazines which they like, and it has a certain you know, they don't have the same with a man in a sense it's... it is erm... but...

I:	That's an interesting point isn't it.

Liz:	But it's... I mean you just need to go, you just need to be in town on a Friday night and you got women dressed up for... and then you have got women... obviously with some... some man in jeans and t-shirt ((laughs)) and you just think.

Lynsey:	Probably quite expensive jeans and t-shirt. ((laughs)).

I:	but has he really tried, has he?

Liz:	It's like what has happened to a shirt and tie come on.  ((laughs)).

I:	We will have to wrap it up there, erm... it's a shame that we didn't have a chance to look at, and perhaps even though we do have to wrap it up, we should have read the poem that comes before this in the book erm... which is, 

Liz:	Is this homework or something? ((laughs))

I:	Jonathon Swift's resolutions on when I come to be old. Not to marry a young woman, erm... 407, not to keep young company unless they really desire it. Not to be peevish or morose or suspicious, not to scorn present ways, or wits or fashions or men or war etc, not to be fond of children or let them come near my hardly. Not to tell the same story over and over to the same people. Not to be covetous.  Not to neglect decency or cleanliness for fear of falling into nastiness. Not to be over severe with young people but to give allowances for their youthful follies and weaknesses. Not to be influenced by or to give in to knavish tattling servants or others. Not to be too free with advice, not trouble any but those that desire it. To desire some good friends, to inform me which of these resolutions I break, or neglect, and wherein and reform accordingly.  Not to talk much, nor of myself.  Not to boast of my former beauty or strength or favour with ladies etc, not to harken to flatteries nor conceive I can be beloved by a young woman, et eos qui hereditatem captant odisse ac vitare   I don't know what that means, not to be positive or opinionative, not to set up for observing all these rules for fear that I should observe none.  Good.

Sue:	That's great that.  

I:	Lovely, lovely let Faith and Hope take it with them.

Liz:	Because it's a shame they followed one at a time because they would have... when you read it it's like... 

I:	What an amazing set of rules he has set himself.

Liz:	I just like the not to be fond of children or let them come near me hardly.  ((laughs))

I:	Ok well I will see you in  a while, after you have had your 6 weeks, downstairs with Graham which I am sure will be absolutely fascinating I really wish I was going with you.  Erm... and I look forward to what you will do.

Mike:	Thanks for...

Sue:	It's been nice, it's been really good.

Lynsey:	Yes, yes I enjoyed it. Did you read the second part of Silas Marner last week?

I:	No we didn't.  We didn't erm... what did we do last week?  

Liz:	Jane Eyre.  

I:	We did some of Jane Eyre.

Lynsey:	Oh right.  

I:	Yes, oh yes.   

Liz:	When you actually read these clips I am thinking I need to get this book, I need to read it.

Sue:	Yes, I have got to read Jane Eyre again, definitely and Silas Marner.  Everything there is just not enough time to read everything.

Liz:	I told you that I found Silas Marner... Marn... Marner?

I:	Yes Marner

Liz:	Marner in the New Brighton erm... 

Sue:	brilliant, you will enjoy it. 

Liz:	and they seemed to have loads of like classics, there seemed to be a lot of...

I:	I have got maybe a desire to eventually read erm... talking to my colleague Chris last night and saying erm... Phil was mentioning something about  Little Dorrit, erm... and I said to Chris maybe if you join my Friday morning reading group we can read Little Dorrit. 

Sue:	Oh yes.

I:	 I would love to read  [01.58.44]

Liz:	I don't think I have got a pen again.

Lynsey:	Oh here you are I have got tons of pens.  I have got  a Reader pen actually ((laughs)). 

Liz:	I wouldn't mind but yesterday I had a pen in my bag.  

I:	All right?   Don't delete it...

Liz:	Do we have to do it all over again ((laughs)). 

I:	Oh no can I help you, not that I am sure I can but... are you ok?

Grace:	It's alright.  

I:	I think the 6 weeks has gone past really quickly.

Sue:	Oh gosh yes it has.

I:	I was amazed when erm... Phil said last night it's the last week today.  Mike can I have a go?

Mike:	Yes please do. 

I: 	I used to be good at this.   If you get it there and just pull it really tight.  

Sue:	Fantastic, that is what it needed.

Mike:	Excellent, thank you.  

I:	It's after having a lot of toddlers, I have only had 2, but lots of their zips have got stuck.  Brilliant radiator this one you know, it has only been on since just about 9.45, baking now.  Hot.  

Liz:	thanks.  I wasn't going to pinch your pen.  

Grace:	I was going to ask if you would be able to come earlier next week, I was going to ask for about 9.30, 

Liz:	My taxi is booked for the same time, so...

I:	Is this because of the swap over?

Grace:	Yes it's because we need to erm... fill in the same forms that were filled in at the beginning of the whole study, so that we can sort of track you know what happened, 

Liz:	I know my taxi is booked for the same time each week.

Grace:	Yes I will try and contact whoever it was who booked the taxi erm... 

I:	Yes and get it changed. 

Grace:	 Ok, I mean would that be alright with you Liz?

I:	I tell you what you know the taxi man, is it the same taxi man?

Liz:	Yes

I:	could you just inform him?

Liz:	Yes, 

I:	So if you inform him and you follow it up at the other end... 

Liz:	It's just that I am already leaving at...

I:	It's too early?

Liz:	It's already very early.  

I:	So can she do it at the end?  

Liz:	I am normally here at 10 to.

Sue:	Thanks Jane, thanks Grace.

I:	Ok bye.  If she can't get here she will have to do it at the end.  So there is you know, there will be a few people who won't be able to get here.

Liz:	Last time when we were sitting there it was getting quite noisy anyhow for me, I had to go home to do it. 

Grace:	Ok, don't worry about it then.

I:	So we will do something else. 

Liz:	Last time ...






