[12.25]

R:		I don’t know what you think is the, perhaps you don’t want to say but the most 
		frightening thing, the most frightening line in the poem. Do you have a sense of 
		that? 

John:		Well I would agree that in a sense, ‘I am the self-consumer of my woes’, that third 
		line, you mentioned that but there’s a sense of really clear self-recognition of the full 
		state of desperation he’s in, that’s he’s the self-consumer of his woes. And it’s a 
		relatively quiet point but it hits.

[16.12]

R:		And then after that, even the dearest that I loved the best, are strange, nay, rather 
		stranger than the rest. It’s odd that the worst, the vast shipwreck, well to me it’s 
		the worst moment, is followed by something that should be really really terrible 
		but it’s as if in size, those dearest seem slightly less of a magnitude than the 

Catherine:	The ship, you could almost hear the shipwreck

R:		the whole thing, somehow. They’re just a part of it.

John:		And that would, a sense of reversal there, that those who were dearest, are now 
		strangest.

R:		Yes so as if the whole thing’s turned upside down, as you say gone into reverse.

[18.50, after Catherine has read]

R:		How does it feel to get those words sort of passing through your mind and body?

Catherine:	I think, well it’s the same when you read it out Jane. It can become personal, you 
		start to think about how the person is feeling. And I think the two lines especially I 
		related to my mother, because my mother suffers from memory loss. And I think 
		does my mother ever think that. I thought that was quite profound when we read 
		the first two lines.

R:		Yes. Do you feel there is something about your mother that is still her.

Catherine:	Yes. But I think sometimes my mother wonders has her personality or identity not, I 
		certainly don’t think that but I think my mother thinks that, her identity is erm not 
		deteriorated, lost really. In fact I know that my mum has this book. 

R:		Oh does she!

Catherine:	And does, no I don’t want to go off what we’re discussing but what I like, my mother 
		was actually picking the book yesterday and remembers poems from childhood. 

R:		Oh lovely, that’s nice...

[23.25]
R:		Like vapours. To feel ‘like vapours’. ‘I am’, ‘like vapours’. And every single word 
		there becomes a hard thing to feel. Vapours, tossed, nothingness, scorn, noise. 

Angela:		It moves from something very kind of solid doesn’t it, you know ‘I am,’ ‘I live’, into 
		kind of ephemeral things and being affected. Now I read it again it looks like that’s 
		already setting up the shipwreck.

R:		Yes.

Angela:		I am, but I’m just at the mercy of

R:		Yes what seem like elements, almost. Storm.

[29.15]

R:		And untroubling and untroubled. Yesterday at this conference I saw somebody 
		presenting about some work they’ve been doing in a prison and it was about 
		forgiveness. It was a really interesting project. She showed some art that some of 
		the prisoners had made and the first thing that she showed up was a card. Like 
		those cards where you make it out of layers of stuff. And it was a heart and 
		present and things like that. And in big childish writing, ‘Forgive me mum’. And I 
		just felt my stomach turn over, at the labour that had gone into that and the 
		desire, whatever, who knows who that young man was, but that that would be the 
		person he would most want to forgive him.

Helen:		See I think where it says about the dearest that I loved best are strange, I think it 
		doesn’t necessarily mean strange as in I never see them, it could mean strange as in 
		I see them all the time but I’m just disconnected from them. 

R:		Yes. Yes. And it’s as if he doesn’t love them now because they seem to be 
		strangers or to behave strangely perhaps to him. I used to think, you said Angela 
		it’s as if it’s coming towards death at the end. I used always to think it was, it was 
		almost like a kind of a decision towards ending life. But the last time I read it I 
		suddenly felt as if he just wanted peace. And that might be as much to do with 
		sleep as anything else. And I don’t know if, you know when you have those periods 
		where sleep is hard to achieve, I don’t know, probably everybody’s had them at 
		some time. There is a sort of terrible desperation that comes on you from if you 
		haven’t had any sleep.

Angela:		It does change slightly doesn’t it at the end, cause I was always, I don’t know, I was 
		aware of the grass and I thought it had got to be the grass above because I always 
		pictured that as being below, and that’s a kind of vision of heaven. But you know the 
		last line is actually like

R:		Looking up

Angela:		it’s beneath, the ground, it’s on it, on the ground.

R:		And yet you do think of grass above don’t you. It is as if somehow the verse makes 
		that image of a grave or something come into your mind, even if you later want to 
		think perhaps it’s not that, perhaps it is just lying on the grass.

John:		Abiding with my creator God though, that’s, get around that one. 

R:		Yes. It is. And, I long for scenes where man has never trod. A place where woman 
		never smiled or wept. There to abide with my creator, God. If we call that heaven, 
		which we might, I don’t know if that slightly takes away from the feeling of what it 
		might be if you’re not a believer in God. What else might it be like, and if that’s a 
		feeling, I long for scenes where man has never trod, a place where woman never 
		smiled or wept, there to abide, with my creator, God, it feels very different to the 
		rest of the poem. 

Angela:		It feels, there’s something about peace isn’t there, because it’s not even talking 
		about being happy. It’s just, doesn’t smile or wept, it’s about peacefulness and to be 
		untroubled.

Helen:		Yes, it’s almost like he wants like freedom from mental turmoil or something like 
		that, you know just to not kind of cause anyone any trouble or feel anything horrible 
		or anything like that.

John:		Escaping the world, in a sense isn’t it. With a sense of obviously in this case a 
		religious space, heaven.

R:		It’s funny though that it doesn’t say heaven. 

John:		No he doesn’t, no no.

R:		I think we feel it as heaven and yet his word is scenes. As if, are they almost like 
		paintings or something. I mean, you know, for us now of course scenes would be 
		almost television or filmic wouldn’t they but for John Clare writing in I don’t know 
		18, let’s have a guess, 1820, scenes would have to be almost like landscape 			pictures wouldn’t they.

Catherine:	A Constable painting.

R:		Yes. I wonder if that’s maybe to do with what one can call up in one’s mind, so if 
		you were in a very bad way, here, like sort of stuck with your terrible situation, 
		that longing for scenes might be almost as if instead of having that shipwreck 
		feeling, which again is visual, isn’t it, that then you might long for other as it were 
		pictures to slot into your head. Where man has never trod. And they’re purely, 
		purely as it were natural or physical, that’s just landscape, there’s no people in it. 
		A place where woman never smiled or wept. There to abide. 

Catherine:	It’s almost as if the everyday life, almost he’s thinking of what he may interpret as 
		paradise.

R:		Yes, yes.

Catherine:	You know the [?] every day or it’s almost as if people are untouched by illness, grief, 
		happiness. It’s...

R:		It’s interesting because of the word abide as well, which has a sense of peace in it. 
		
		But I don’t know if for me that’s only coming from knowing hymns like Abide with 
		me and things so maybe

Catherine:	And I think the second line, ‘a place where woman never smiled or wept’ [pause] 

R:		So...

Catherine:	Neither a woman can not display happiness or sadness.

Helen:		It’s almost as if like where man has never trod and where woman never smiled or 
		wept kind of he’s saying it doesn’t really exist. Like peace or whatever doesn’t exist 
		because wherever man has trod and then you know they don’t feel peace or 
		whatever.

R:		Yes it’s interesting that he divides the work up between them like that, that the 
       man would have the word trod, it’s as if he’s setting out like pioneers conquering 
       the earth

Catherine:	Purposeful

R:		walking down the road, and in the wake of that human development, woman, 
		smiling or weeping. 

Angela:		Women did the emotion. And yet, it’s full of emotion

R:		Yes! Absolutely full. 

John:		I mean yes that’s interesting, it’s a space beyond the living isn’t it.

Helen:		Yes.

John:		It’s a space beyond the living. And it could be just a wish for as it were sweeter 
		imaginings than he’s having at the moment. But actually that abide with God sounds 
		a little bit more like a

R:		Yes, a permanent state, yes.

Helen:		But could abide with God just be like something from that era that we wouldn’t 
		necessarily say today so it has a different meaning to us today, it seems more

R:		More definite.

Helen:		yes and more kind of significant to us today whether in the past it might have been a 
		more easy to use phrase, you know. 

R:		Yes. I’m just thinking of ‘abide’. Is it to do with waiting? I’m just thinking of like 
		biding your time. Or is it to do with

John:		Abide. Like having a close relationship with God, a stronger relationship with God as 
		opposed to as it were 

Helen:		And kind of like sticking it out, so...

John:		living there, up there in heaven, you know. 

Angela:		It can mean both can’t it, like God inside you or alongside God, on earth.

R:		So if we had to substitute a word for abide there, would you go Helen for 
		something like stay, or stick with.

Helen:		Yes!

R:		I like sticking it out.

[47.30]

Angela:		It feels, it all feels very frenzied doesn’t it, the first two lines, but stifled because 
		really it is just going on inside his head.

R:		Yes, so there’s no, it’s not like any shouting out, or...

[51.15]

R:		‘I long for scenes’. We were just saying before you came back in Helen that 
		something about the achievement of the full stop at the end of that second verse, 
		coming to a place where you can stop the thought, really, leads to that new verb in 
		the third verse of ‘long’. Which is a very different, although longing is a sad feeling, 
		yet there’s a something, is it? Sad, I think it is. There’s something almost hopeful in 
		it because if you can bear to long for something 

Helen:		You know it’s

R:		you know what it is

Helen:		you know it’s there, you know there is something

John:		Yes it’s not a desperate emotion is it.

R:		No.

Angela:		Is it almost like daring to hope, because I was thinking that, I was thinking is there 
		hope in longing but sometimes there is

R:		Sometimes there isn’t it, yes. 

Angela:		that’s a possibility

[53.20]

R:		And there’s that pause that you read really well, where the comma is, there’s a 
		pause there and it’s as if, that’s an achieved statement. God.

[59.35]

R:		The grass below, above. And I think vaulted, if they wired my brain up when I’m 
		reading it, I feel as if something massive would happen at that word vaulted as if it 
		requires me to look up, or to feel up, in some way. The grass below, above the 
		vaulted. The rhythm makes you go up. Above, the vaulted sky.

[1.00.20]

Angela:		What it brings up for me is kind of in my work every day I kind of have to ask the 
		question, as part of risk, have you thought you’d be better off dead. And lots of 
		people answer yes to that, but kind of on further explanation quite often what they 
		mean is oh I don’t really mean I want to die I just wish I could go to sleep and not 
		wake up. And again, an earlier question on that kind of measuring depression, as it 
		is, kind of disturbed sleep nearly always goes with that and quite often the images of 
		well I don’t mean I wish I was dead it’s about peace and not sleeping. I just wish I 
		could go to sleep. Quite often never wake up but they don’t mean death. What they 
		mean is if I could wake up and not feel like this, not feel all this, first two paragraphs.



