John:	Yes that's right I mean I was a little bit late, I couldn’t remember, just... but usually it’s about 5 minutes past... 

Catherine:	It is normally about... Yes and I wasn't sure if I was going to, because my mother had er workmen but they say the work  might have carried on until today but it didn't, it was until yesterday so I am pleased.  You are leaving us one week aren't you?

John:	Yes, yes I think so.  

Catherine:	Would anybody like a drink?

John:	I am fine. Yes it would be nice to keep up the full record I think I have got to miss one.

Catherine:	but sometimes you know there are things that are planned beforehand, it's like my wasn’t and I was really doubtful

[talk over]

Angela:	Coffee the most important.

John:	I think I will have a drink of water actually. I just had a rather stiff breakfast [01.20]

Catherine: 	Would you like a drink Angela?

Angela:	Oh yes please Catherine [01.28]

Catherine:	Actually I am going to let you put your own coffee in, because people... I don't know whether I like it too strong.

John:	you take that I am just going to drink a cup of water.

Jane:	hello everybody. Morning.

Catherine:	Don’t the weeks go quickly. Well I think they do anyway. The weeks.

Jane:	Yes, whizzing by aren’t they!

Catherine: 	Yes, they really are. I just read the er...

Maureen:	A bit cooler in here as well which is nice, it was very warm in here last week wasn't it, I had a job keeping...

[talk over]

Jane:	I had the radiator on for so long. Last week, I put it on about 3. But I have only just put it on now. It gets really hot. 

John:	It is an efficient heating system if it's an old boiler system isn't it.  

Jane:	I don't know how old the boiler is erm... the radiators are obviously a few years old, but they are fantastic radiators.

John:	Yes that's right,

Jane:	but not all of them work that one doesn't work I don't think.

Maureen:	It is not at the moment. 

[talk over]

Angela:	I like that, I just like warm squash sometimes when it's cold. 

Catherine:	Helen would you like a drink or?

[talk over]

Catherine:	Jane would you like a drink?

Jane:	Actually I would really like a cup of tea please. Sorry. Helen she wants nothing.  There is one for you. Angela.  I will come back to you. You are Helen aren't you?  You are Helen, ok John, now the other man's name is David he is not well this week.  Erm... I can't remember... ok erm... I don't believe it's Mary, 

Maureen:	No but almost.

Jane:	It is Maria?

Maureen:	No 

Jane:	M...

Maureen:	Maureen.

Jane:	Thank you Maureen.

Maureen:	Irish Mary.

Jane:	Oh is it Maureen, I didn't realise that.  

Catherine:	there you are Jane.

Jane:	Thank you very much.   Helen would you mind shutting that door...

Maureen:	I was just going to say shall I...

Jane:	thank you, thank you Maureen.  Ok so today we are going to read erm... a section called Strange Ladies which is an extract from Great Expectations and then a poem.  And, erm... I pick the stories each week on the basis of trying to choose things that would be a kind of account of going along through life in some way or other. So erm.. this partly takes us to the place of erm... where we have been a little bit already of young people, so thinking of those dancers and the young guy last week who all kinds of things nearly happened to him but they didn't. And in this Pip who is the hero of Great Expectations is probably erm... about 9 years old, sorry we are on page 39.   And erm... has, is growing up with his sister and brother-in-law bringing him up and destined to be a blacksmith when as I am sure you all know he gets this strange call from some posh lady in town saying Miss Havisham requires  a boy, so  erm... in this extract he has been summoned to Satis House by Miss Havisham a wealthy old woman, who having been jilted by her fiancé on the very day of her wedding has lived out the rest of her life as if in a state of suspended animation. Never leaving the room in which she received her terrible news.

Maureen:	Excuse me I just need... ((leaves the room))

Jane:	I knocked and was told from within to enter. I entered therefore and found myself in a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles, no glimpse of day light was to be seen it was a dressing room as I supposed from the furniture, though much of it was of forms and uses then quite unknown to me.  But prominent in it was a draped table with a gilded looking glass, and that I made out at first sight to be a fine lady's dressing table.   Whether I should have made this object out so soon if there had been no fine lady sitting at it, I cannot say.  In an armchair with an elbow resting on the table and her head leaning on that hand sat the strangest lady I have ever seen, or shall ever see.  She was dressed in rich materials, satins and lace and silks all of white, her shoes were white and she had a long white veil dependent from her hair and she had bridal flowers in her hair but her hair was white.  Some bright jewels sparkled on her neck and on her hands and some other jewels lay sparking on the dress... on the table.  Dresses,  less splendid than the dress she wore and half packed trunks were scattered about. She had not quite finished dressing for she had but one shoe on, the other was on the table near her hand. Her veil was half arranged, her watch and chain were not put on and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets and with her handkerchief and gloves and some flowers, and a prayer book all confusedly heaped about the looking glass. It was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed.   But I saw that everything within my view which ought to be white, had been white long ago and had lost its lustre and was faded and yellow. I saw that the bride within the bridal dress had withered like the dress, and like the flowers, and had no brightness left but the brightness of her sunken eye. I saw that the dress had been put upon the rounded figure of a young woman, and that the figure upon which it now hung loose had shrunk to skin and bone.  Once I had been taken to see some ghastly waxwork at the fair, representing I know not what impossible personage lying in state. Once I had been taken to one of our old marsh churches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug out of a vault under the church pavement. Now waxwork and skeleton seemed to have dark eyes, that moved and looked at me. I should have cried out if I could. Who is it said the lady at the table. Pip ma'am. Pip, Mr Pumblechook's boy ma'am, come to play. Come nearer let me look at you come close.  It was when I stood before her avoiding her eyes that I took note of the surrounding objects in detail and saw that her watch had stopped at 20 minutes to 9, and that a clock in the room had stopped at 20 minutes to 9. 

	We will stop there for a minute I think. Catherine you have caught a bit of tissue or something on the side of your glasses.

	Erm... I don't know, everybody knows this story don't they but I don't know if anybody has recently read it,  have you?

Helen:	Yes, well it was in January, so 

Jane:	Right so it's still fresh in your... were you aware reading it of any sort of, how different it seemed to what you will have seen on the telly or... do you think there is a difference between the story commonly known to all of us and...

Angela:	I have not read it, I have only ever seen the film and the television productions.  

Jane:	Yes. So does it... I mean obviously it's the same characters...

Helen:	Yes

Catherine:	but I think it's, if you read the book beforehand it's your imagination it is images you have, your own personal images you have.

Jane:	Yes, yes

Catherine:	about the person which I think is so rich for yourself and often if you see  a film or a series, it can be quite disappointing.

Jane:	Yes that's right it's fine if you see the telly version first and then you can think oh that was good I think I will read the book, but erm... but it's hard the other way round. Did you think that, you must have seen TV...

Helen:	I don't think I have ever seen a TV version the whole way through I think I have only ever seen bits of it here and there so, the book was the first time I had kind of got the whole story so...

Jane:	So... good. So anything we want to notice in this part, so far or bring out from the beginning. Erm...  I just wonder if you were interested in the difference between what Pip is seeing or noticing, I am thinking of on page 40 that long paragraph she was dressed in rich materials, erm... where he is just describing one object after another to try and make you see it.  But also those little moments where you realise though Pip is a little boy in this part, it is not a little boy who is telling us it, like for example... erm... on the bottom of 39, where he says it was a dressing room as I supposed from the furniture, though much of it was of forms and uses then quite unknown to me. You know as if he is remembering seeing something when he was 9 which he understands now, knows what a fine lady's dressing room looks like but when he was 9, and had only lived in the blacksmith's cottage, he had no idea and I suppose, that is a bit like us if we went to erm... Buckingham Palace or something and I don't know what those tables are called that are down all the Queen's very fine hall like rooms at the side with you know, first edition of Charles Darwin on them or something like that but we don't know what those kind of pieces of furniture are called, well I suppose most of us don't. 

Angela:	It's a console table.	

Jane:	((laughs)) it's a console table, yes ok...

Angela:	that's what [14.02]


Jane:	Ok so you might kind of go in and then later someone will say oh they are called consoles but to us they are just like not what we, we don't experience anything like that.  Erm... and that is what it is like for him.  Erm... but now, we know, he does know what a fine lady's dressing table looks like.  And erm... and again on page 40 where he says it was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed.  Erm... which is a very adult observation isn't it, it isn't what a 9 year old would notice about himself.  And I am wondering if you have any memories of very important days in your life where you have been somewhere erm... first day at secondary school I can remember, really, really clearly sitting in the hall in our uniforms being addressed by teachers and strange looking ((laughs)) people.

Catherine:	You didn't think they were human. I didn't.

Jane:	((laughs)) no and in those days it was a Grammar school and they all wore academic gowns, so they sort of came on the stage and had these black things on and... and you know I was an ordinary working class kid, my mom was a barmaid, I don't think I had ever met a middle class person in my life, extremely posh people addressed us, erm... I can remember it really, really clearly.   And don't know how, whether, at those moments or if you think of first day in a job, even now, you know starting a new job it is as if things rush at you and press on you those un... erm... processed bits of information in a way that once you were used to it. I think coming here for the first day, when you signed up for the project, we sat... in that back room and you know do you remember that very clearly  now?  

Catherine:	yes I do but mine wasn't associated with the research as soon as I walked in I recognised Erin and I thought that's the lady  that went swimming at the university ((laughs)) and you know I got the association but not... not there, but at the university so that's... that's the first thing. But you know you do view things differently when you are coming again for the second or third time or so.

Jane:	Yes. So what do you think happens to our brain when we got to a completely new situation why do you think, if we read that again and listened to what he notices. She was dressed in rich materials, satins and lace and silks all of white, her shoes were white, and she had a long white veil, dependent from her hair.  And she had bridal flowers in her hair but her hair was white. Some bright jewels sparkled on her neck and on her hands, and some other jewels lay sparking on the table, dresses, less splendid than the dress she wore and half packed trunks were scattered about she had not quite finished dressing for she had put one shoe on the other was on the table near her hand. Her veil was but half arranged, her watch and chain were not put on, and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets and with her handkerchief and gloves, and some flowers and a prayer book all confusedly heaped about the looking glass.  If we were neuroscientists that we only had this to go on as to how people react to new situations, erm... what do you think we would be making of it?

Angela:	I am not sure we do [18.25] so reading it again it was interesting it says it was not in the first few moments that I saw all of these things. So that's already implying we are back in times, because when you said about kind of the first time in here I can remember things about the first day but it's just been constantly added to, so it's...

Jane:	by coming again.

John:	It's a switch on isn't it. Memories are kind of instantaneous partial visual recollections where if you write it down erm... in a diary, then it starts to become a sequence of descriptions and... what we are taken through here is a very steady sequence of description that builds up and it's slightly different, the way you recall...

Jane:	that's right yes which could be much more sort of for want of a better word 3D or all at once or...

John:	Yes, yes. One of the pleasures of writing even if you are not going to publish is to get that, detail into a memory isn't it?

Jane:	Yes. That is interesting about erm... sequentialness erm... I am just thinking, if I just imagine that my story since I came in this room, erm... it is a sequence, I definitely experience it as a sequence but I also particularly when I was just standing here and you called me Helen for the first time ((laughs)) and I didn't know how to, just thinking back I just didn't know what that was, that was like a little part of me that was going confusion is happening I don't know where everyone is, erm... so it was, I am just thinking there is both sequential and there is something more blurry than that which may be like when you can't understand everything at once, in simple sequences and I think yours is an added point isn't it really of, if it becomes something you then repeat like going to work every day.  Partly how one thinks of that information changes just over time as well, erm... but if somebody said right Jane your task is to write down what it feels like to enter that room, erm... and start the reading group, I mean it's as if it could take me, if you really went into all the possible sequential detail it could take hours.  

Catherine:	Because you break it down.

Helen:	It's like if you go into a new situation, sometimes you are not sure which bit  of it you are meant to be paying attention to, and then when you have done it again and again you know which bits are important, so that is what you focus on.

Jane:	That's right so though we move through it sequentially in time, it, reality, comes at us in sometimes inseparable bits...

John:	yes that's right and this concentrates very closely as it opens up on the physical world doesn't it so if you were asked can you remember starting a reading group, and you think about it, you  might start with your mental state rather than the physical which is the room.

Jane:	Yes, yes

John:	this really hits you with detailed, physical things doesn't it?

Jane:	Yes that is right. Erm... and it's interesting, where he says it was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I saw more of them in the first few moments, than might be supposed.... as if he has had that sort of massive, onslaught almost of unprocessable  but presumably the thing you are talking about Angela is actually he, what happens in the story is he comes back to this room and to this woman time after time, week after week after week, so he does see it a lot of times.  And gradually must come to know it is satin, it's lace, it is silk, but if you were saying what's the overriding impression from that paragraph, if you had to pick out one or two words, what would they be?

Angela:	White.

Jane:	Yes white, it's massive isn't it.  See sparkling, spark, sparkled and sparkling comes back. 

Catherine:	It does

Jane:	Scattered is a word I have noticed.  And then maybe the ands at the end as it builds up her veil was but half arranged, her watch and chain were not put on and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets, and it's as if I half expect that to come to a full stop but it doesn't, and... with her handkerchief and gloves, and some flowers, and a prayer book, it is as if those might be all things that he has noticed one week he might have noticed the prayer book, another week he might have noticed erm... the lace,  but perhaps confusedly is a big word because all confusedly heaped about the looking glass maybe that's what he is noticed is white there is lots of white and there is, there is some element of chaos.  Erm... it was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I saw more of them in the first moments than might be supposed  but I saw that everything within my view, which ought to be white had been white long ago and had lost its lustre and was faded and yellow. I saw that the bride within the bridal dress had withered like the dress and like the flowers, and had no brightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes. So these are things he is telling us he saw, in those that very first moment, and just thinking I would ask you to think back to childhood, and think about meeting someone or seeing someone especially maybe an old person erm... or going somewhere, and thinking when, what do you remember noticing about all perhaps noticing is not the right word, almost like feeling or apprehending about somebody. I slightly remember being quite scared of old people, not that they would hurt me or anything but just ((laughs)) that I didn't quite like them.  Erm... or, or there was something about them that was... foreign.

Catherine:	I suppose it's the ageing process, to see someone so I suppose, their later years they almost, to me they look withered, and I suppose as a child you are not used to seeing somebody like that. I remember when I went erm... as a child into a, erm... nursing home I think it was [25.54] and I like you was a little bit... because I haven't... and it wasn't just one lady it was...

Jane:	Yes especially as there would have been quite a lot of them yes.  Yes I remember going to a nursing home, in Parkgate when we lived in Neston as a child and my cousin was in a dancing class and they were going to put on a dance in this place and for some reason I was taken along even though I wasn't part of the dancing class, and one old lady who was in a wheelchair, rather kindly said to me are you not going to be in the dancing and I remember thinking it's not my fault ((laughs)) it's not my fault I don't even know why I am here.  

Catherine:	I think we went either to sing carols, we went to do something and I think like you it was... the nursing home and they probably were so delighted to see us but as a child...

Maureen:	It's just a lack of understanding really.

Catherine:	It is, it is.

Jane:	Yes

Maureen:	My dad was in a nursing home and I had to take my son along and he was not too happy really when he was about 8 or 9, he would go in and he was ok, with his own granddad.

Jane:	 But the atmosphere of the place almost...

Maureen:	be a bit kind of... you could see the erm...

Catherine:	Unfamiliar.

Maureen:	yes.  Bit of stress there you know. 

Jane:	Yes my nan was a cleaner  and she used to have like a round, that she would go all posh old ladies houses to do their cleaning,  round Wirral on the bus and sometimes in the holidays I would go with her, ((laughs)) I suppose she was minding me, but it didn't seem like that at the time it was more like I went with her.  And erm... there was one who was called Nurse Bains who probably was almost housebound and I remember really not liking her cardigans and like not liking the colour of them or the kind of look of them ((laughs)) and just thinking oh... quite, why would you be scared of that it's ... she was a nice lady and she used to make that lovely Scottish fudge you know that tablet.

Catherine:	yes and she probably so looked forward to you coming because often young and old... somehow there is no boundary it is very therapeutic. So she probably so looked forward to you visiting, and she didn't know that you were thinking about her cardigan.. 

Jane:	((talk over)) I know but she had her cardigans that I didn't like.  ((laughs))

John:	It's the strangeness.

Jane:	Yes I suppose it is that.

John:	When I was a little boy I had a great grandma who lived in a village not far from the city and erm... I was taken there, I always remember being taken there one Christmas and she was in that, in a little parlour of her cottage and it was a bit Dickensian, it was dark, there was a grandfather clock behind her and she was sitting in a rocking chair, all dressed in black, and I felt she was really frightening, and my mother was saying give Gran a kiss ((laughs)) and she reached out she wanted to give me a kiss, and I thought oh dear ((laughs)) But I know it was a really strong memory of fear and... and then finally ok you know erm... I left the room, but the memory stayed with me very powerfully.

Jane:	So partly just anxiety about odd new situations.

John:	Yes

Jane:	And partly perhaps what you are also saying Catherine about natural fear almost of unknown old people or, like but you know thinking of my own grandparents I don't think I was scared of their wrinkles or anything but that was because they were real, people to me.

Catherine:	Yes and they were in your lives.  Yes...

John:	Yes I think familiarity. I mean my great gran I didn't see her very often but she was talked about a lot you know, there were all sorts of stories you know, I suppose she become a bit of a kind of legendary ((laughs))...

Jane:	Yes a bit of a mythic dimension to her?

John:	yes, so you were in the presence of something you know...

Jane:	yes that was bit, that you knew adults were concerned about anyway.

Angela:	I think I mostly remember smells when I [29.59] and I don't remember that much, I don't remember feeling frightened but I had an elderly aunty and I can remember smells, some kind of disinfectant she used, very, very different to the smells in our house. I don't know whether it was lavender or something  or moths balls it might have been.  But very odd smells and when I am thinking back to that, as well it's kind of it you could think of a smell to me it would be musty kind of... stale, 

Jane:	Moth bally camphor, 

Angela:	That definitely erm...  [30.29] that describes... 

Jane:	Alright so we are with him a bit now and especially once he starts getting to, remembering on 41.  Once I had been taken to see some ghastly waxwork, at the fair, representing I know not what impossible personage lying in state, so maybe King George V or III or something like that. Once I had been taken to one of our old marsh churches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug out of a vault under the church pavement. Now, waxwork and skeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at me, I should have cried out, if I could. Who is it, said the lady at the table, Pip ma'am. Pip? Mr  Pumblechook's boy ma'am come to play.  Come nearer let me look at you. Come close.  It was when I stood before her avoiding her eyes that I took note of the surrounding objects in detail. 

	That is interesting as if erm... he really can't make eye contact with her, he really is too afraid to do that.  And that is I suppose when you start honing in on just thinking there are 5 different kind of biscuits on the plate, in that desperate avoidance not to make any connection really.  

	Erm... I took note of surrounding objects in detail and saw that her watch had stopped at 20 minutes to 9 and that a clock in the room had stopped at 20 minutes to 9.  Look at me said Miss Havisham, you are not afraid of a woman who has never seen the sun since before you were born, since you were born?  I regret to state that I was not afraid of telling the enormous lie comprehended in the answer no. Do you know what I touch here she said laying her hands one upon the other on her left side.  Yes ma'am, it made me think of the young man, young man that had threatened him. What do I touch. Your heart. Broken she uttered the word with an eager look and with a strong emphasis and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it.  Afterwards she kept her hands there for a little while and slowly took them away, as if they were heavy.  I am tired said Miss Havisham I want diversion and I have done with men and women.  Play.  I think it will be conceded by the most disputatious reader that she could hardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything in the wide world more difficult to be done under the circumstances. I sometimes have sick fancies she went on, and I have a sick fancy that I want to see some play, there, there, with an impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand, play, play, play.  But I felt myself so unequal to the performance, I stood looking at Miss Havisham in what I suppose she took for a dogged manner in as much as she said when we had taken a good look at each other, are you sullen and obstinate. No ma'am I am very sorry for you and very sorry I can't play just now, if you complain at me I shall get into trouble with my sister and so I would do it if I could but it's so new here and so strange and so fine and melancholy.  I stopped fearing I might say too much or had already said it, and we took another look at each other.  

	I just one to look at those moments where they look at each other because I am interested that at first when she says come close, he is avoiding her eyes and he can't look at her or he doesn't want to or is afraid of it,  but... then he does look at her doesn't he when she says broken, he is really looking at her, she uttered the word with an eager look and with a strong emphasis and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it and afterwards so he is really observing her at that point. Erm... and then he says half way down that page 42, that I felt myself so unequal to the performance that I stood looking at Miss Havisham, in what I suppose she took for a dogged manner and then a bit further down, where I have just stopped, erm... we took another look at each other.  Erm... could you do a sort of erm... be a... psychoanalyst or a psychologist or a psychiatrist or a human behaviourist and observe them, what is happening when they are... because looking at each other really intensely in that way, two people in one weird dark room, feels quite confrontational I don't know what you think of...  of him really because he has hardly said anything.  Erm... play, but I felt myself so unequal to the performance that I stood looking at Miss Havisham in what I suppose she took for a dogged manner. So anything you have ever experienced that is like that, that moment where you absolutely can't do anything?  But he is not as if he can't do anything and as before not able to look at her, he can't do anything and he is locked into eye contact. Does that, have you ever experienced that or... can you imagine it in another setting?

Helen:	I think children do that quite often when they don't know what to do, if they are a bit shy or whatever then they just kind of look at you because they are too shy to say, what.. or can't express what they are feeling or whatever, so they just look.

Jane:	So that, I mean from a biological point of view that look do you think that is like sort of as if to say, I stare at you and you will give me the clue then...

Helen:	yes

Jane:	I will get something back but it's almost as if she has got nothing to give back. She took it for a dogged manner, in as much as she said when we had taken a good look at each other, that is an interesting it feels aggressive or combative doesn't it? When we had taken... and you kind of wonder, presumably he doesn't think of himself as sullen and obstinate, just stuck. Erm... yet you feel if you were an actor, and I was directing you in the play I would be saying you are not afraid are you afraid of her or what, I mean when we had taken a good look at each other, if you had to act that out I feel it's... 

John:	she has a rather odd line in conversational openers of course as well doesn't she, so she ((laughs)) she hits him straight away, with you know confrontation.  

Jane:	Yes are you sullen.

John:	Yes, and three questions, indeed right at the start of the exchange erm... do you know what I touch, erm what do I touch and it's... she puts him on the back foot straight away, quite apart from the oddness of the...

Jane:	when she says broken it is so very theatrical isn't it, it's like she is wanting to see what effect this has on him.  Broken.  With a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it.  Erm... so his response no ma'am I am very sorry for you, I am very sorry I can't play  just now, but you see he is as a child extremely certain of his ground in a way isn't he?

Catherine:	Yes he is almost quietly confident in her commanding, and then he has obviously reflected and thought no ma'am to say I am very sorry for you and very sorry I can't play just now.

Maureen:	It's like as if he is erm... almost as if he... is either, everything has gone blank or he has froze but not to a degree where he can't actually... tell her.

Jane:	Yes but he definitely knows he can't play.

Catherine:	I  mean it's almost as if she you know, he is a performing seal at a circus, you will do what I ask.

Helen:	Yes.

John:	Yes that's right.  And some of that coolness in his response, no ma'am probably derives from the kind of adult reflection. I mean it's not actually directly taken as a... what he said, I mean it is in one sense of course, but it's also a reflection on what he said.  

Jane:	yes so do you think...

John:	[40.29 - talk over] and it seems as you were saying it seems a bit cool, considered, it seems to be adult that response.

Catherine:	It is.

Jane:	but that is given us as, as a direct....

John:	Oh it is given as a...

Jane:	Yes but you do wonder what his adult, it's as if the layers of child and adult in what we are reading here,  they feel like a trifle that the layers have got a bit mixed up. But direct speech no ma'am I am very sorry for you, very sorry I can't play just now and very erm... worldly in a way. If you complain of me I shall get into trouble with my sister ((laughs)). I mean we don't know from this extract but in the story of course his sister really badly abuses him, beats him, hits him...

Angela:	I mean I can imagine a child saying that you know, I am going to get into trouble here... and feeling that, you know but the rest of it, I mean if I would need to kind of pinpoint that it seems very adult, even to use the word melancholy which was probably 

[talk together]

Angela: 	in more common use than it is now but you know, 

Jane:	But it's so new here and so strange and so fine and melancholy I stopped fearing I might say too much or had already said it. And we took another look at each other.  That feels very, like 2 equals.

Catherine:	Oh yes.

Jane:	almost on... in a boxing ring or a battle ground.

Maureen:	You wouldn't expect a child to come out with a response like that at all.

Jane:	[talk over] No, not that. Before she spoke again she turned her eyes from me and looked at the dress she wore and at the dressing table, and finally at herself in the looking glass.  So new to him she muttered, so old to me.  So strange to him, so... familiar to me.  So melancholy to both of us.  Call Estella, you can do that.  Call Estella.  To stand in the dark,  in a mysterious passage of an unknown house, bawling Estella  to a scornful young lady neither visible nor responsive, and feeling it a dreadful liberty to so roar out her name was almost as bad as playing to order. But she answered at last and her light came along the dark passage like a star. Miss Havisham beckoned her to come close, let me see you play cards with this boy. With this boy?  Why he is a common labouring boy, I thought I overhead Miss Havisham answer, only it seemed so unlikely well... you can break his heart.  What do you play boy asked Estella of myself, with the greatest disdain.  Nothing but beggar my neighbour miss, Beggar him said Miss Havisham to Estella so we sat down to cards.  It was then I began to understand that everything in the room had stopped like the watch, and the clock a long time ago. I noticed that Miss Havisham  put down the jewel exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up, as Estella dealt the cards, I glanced at the dressing table again and saw that the shoe upon it once white, now yellow, had never been worn.  I glanced down at the foot from which the shoe was absent and saw that the silk stocking on it once white, now yellow had been trodden ragged. Without this arrest of everything this standing still of all the pale decayed objects, not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed form could have looked so like grave clothes or the long veil so like a shroud.  So she sat, corpse like as we played at cards the frillings and trimmings on her bridal dress, looking like earthy paper. I knew nothing then of the discoveries that are occasionally  made of bodies buried in ancient times which fall to powder in the moment of being distinctly seen but I have often thought since that she must have looked as if the admission of the natural light of day would have struck her to dust.  He calls the knaves Jacks this boy, said Estella with disdain before our first game was out. And what coarse hands he has, and what thick boots I had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before but  I began to consider them a very indifferent pair her contempt for me was so strong, that it became infectious and I caught it.  She won the game and I dealt, I misdealt as was only  natural when I knew she was lying in wait for me to do wrong and she denounced me for a stupid, clumsy, labouring boy. You say nothing of her remarked Miss Havisham to me as she looked on, she says many hard things of you but you say nothing of her.   What do you think of her?  I don't like to say I stammered. Tell me in my ear, said Miss Havisham bending down, I think she is very proud I replied in a whisper.  Anything else. I think she is very pretty, anything else. I think she is very insulting she was looking at me then with a look of supreme aversion, anything else? I think I should like to go home, and never see her again though she is so pretty. I am not sure that I shouldn't like to see her again but I should like to home soon said Miss Havisham aloud, play the game out. 

	Just stop there for a minute. See what you are thinking of this weird... weird woman. I don't know if you know, from memory of the films or the story or anything but Estella lives with Miss Havisham and is a sort of, sort of ward, like adopted daughter that she is bringing up and she is about 14 in this part, so older than Pip and very lovely. Erm... what do you think about the second look where he starts, bottom of 43, where he starts to look again at her and to erm... we sat down to cards and it was then I began to understand that everything in the room had stopped and you get another sort of roll of, of noticing the particular things. I noticed that Miss Havisham put the jewel down exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up. It's time to confess whether you are tidy methodical person or not? So I can never find anything of mine because I am completely not, including my car keys, my glasses, my book everything you know my husband always says why don't you just put them in the same place, the keys for example erm... after 30 years of marriage I have started trying to do that and I would say maybe 6 times out of 10 I do put them in the same place now, but he... would always have things in the same place.  So is that disposition, habit, do they represent different parts of your personality? What do you do, tidy or untidy?

Helen:	Untidy ((laughs)) my room is an absolute tip.  

Jane:	really?

Helen:	yes

Jane:	that's interesting.  Yes and do you think... does it bother you or do you  mind or...

Helen:	It doesn't bother me particularly.  I find everything in the end so... ((laughs)) 

Jane:	I have started to get a bit bothered sometimes when I have spent days looking for  something. But on the whole no I have lived in it for a long time, but when somebody is like that that they would have a thing that they would always put in the same place, do you know anybody like that or are any of you like that?

Maureen:	With certain things I like them to be, certain things have a place. I am very tidy in some areas, very untidy in others, it varies.

Jane:	So when you say things like, a vase or do you  mean something like that that is like a permanent fixture?

Maureen:	Well yes things like that in the house have their place and I like things to be tidy but  we have got a spare room oh ((laughs)) which is called the dumping ground, but even with... even within the dumping ground I can put my hand on a pair of scissors a piece of string, an elastic band...

Jane:	Right you still know...

Maureen:	Kind of, sometimes it means going through drawers and drawers for things, erm... so yes I like the house, the home to be tidy but as I say we have got the dumping ground, which tends to...

Jane:	which is like sort of legal chaos isn't it really?

Maureen:	yes it is. Don't know what I would do without that.

Jane:	yes if it got out. Whereas every night when I take my watch off, I leave it in a different place and some days I have to come to work with no watch because I just can't find where I put it down the night before.

Helen:	I mean thinking about that there are some things that I always put in the same place.  Like my watch always goes in the same place, every night. 

Jane:	Right, which is handy. 

Helen:	Yes 

Jane:	So what about then somebody who has created a space in which everything... what... why is that different to what we might do or... what if you had a friend who was living like that what would you be thinking of it?

Maureen:	Envy ((laughs))

Jane:	because there would always be order?

Maureen:	Hmm it depends on the person's life really erm... like you say the keys, if I come in on my own I would come in and put the keys on the key hanger, but usually I come in with 2 bags of shopping, and you know... cat screaming at the door and

Jane:	And that is when you... put the keys in the fridge.

Maureen:	phone is ringing and you know I leave the keys in the front door and then someone will come behind saying we could have been burgled and it depends on if you have got a very erm... I suppose, organised lifestyle, a non-eventful day, if she is just sat in this room all the time, more or less or in this house, doesn't do a lot.  

Jane:	Yes just thinking back like some of it, where he sort of describes the dressing table, and everything is lying confusedly about but now we learn that actually that lace handkerchief, gloves, flowers, she is putting them all back like that, she is keeping, 

Angela:	she is frozen in time isn't she, life has stopped at twenty to 9 or whatever on that day, and I suppose thinking about it now it's probably a kind of...  ((speaks really quietly)) to some degree it’s probably some sort of form of OCD, but you know how she has, her obsession is what happened at the time and her compulsion is to keep everything exactly as it was, nothing moved forward from then.

John:	that's right it's a process frozen isn't it, and I mean the chaos isn't chaos of a person who hasn't got a proper sequence it's someone who has just stopped doing stuff, as it were and all the things that they were doing have stopped being done, with all the objects still...

Jane:	so it is like a sort of camera shot almost of... it's a still.

John:	that's right yes.

Maureen:	It puts me in mind of you know the way sometimes if a person loses somebody and they keep their room as it was, I suppose that is a similarity really  [talk over]

John:	that's right

Maureen:	They don't like anything to be moved.

Angela:	And to that end it usually then causes distress to the person if it's not kept... so that’s the thing about, because we were saying something about we all have some kind of order, it is important and to some greater or lesser degree but when it becomes distressful if things aren't in that order...

Maureen:	That is just it, to what degree it kind of... 

Angela:	...your mind

Maureen:	it's like hoarding I suppose.

Catherine:	Well there is always going to be an underlying element, there always is, of something that has happened in people's lives.

Jane:	what for hoarding?

Catherine:	Yes it's often not the hoarding it's an incident that has occurred. Or the same with people that perhaps are addicted to alcohol or an eating disorder, there is always an underlying factor...

Angela:	[53.47]

Catherine:	but with this Miss Havisham, the only thing that erm... that had remained are her jewels still sparkle, as if with the new, but everything else...

Jane:	Has decayed yes.

John:	Yes that's right. I mean in that sense

Jane:	I suppose they do keep don't they.

Catherine:	Yes and they will be jewels, no imitations.  

Jane:	so even though she has stopped or you said like a still photograph or frozen, life itself actually hasn't stopped because the stocking foot has got worn out, erm... even the white lovely shoe, has yellowed even though it's never been worn it's as if we may stop or parts of our personality stop but even if we just all froze now, eventually the biscuits would mould or mice would come in and eat them or erm... life itself won't stop erm... which is perhaps why you get that feeling of decay in it as well it's as if decay is a form of change isn't it erm... not, 

Maureen:	I think what Angela said was a really good point that you said it was a coping mechanism for her you know that she was keeping things as they were, so she could go on with other things as long as, that particular erm... part of things is kept the same.

Jane:	Yes stays the same.

Angela:	I am just thinking of when you do see it in films or TV there is quite often a wedding cake isn't there, that is mouldy and covered in cobwebs.

Jane:	that's right yes.

Angela:	And there is the food still on the table.

Jane:	and there are mice in them, that's right the wedding breakfast is there, and I think that is in the book too I think erm... it is as if she is just sitting in the... literal ruins of that day.

Angela:	And also the bitterness of it, the bitterness and kind of malevolence of it, I feel really concerned for Pip this little boy being in this...

Jane:	Uncle Pumblechook shouldn't have let him go here.  Erm... yes that gets worse and you do get deeply worried don't you with erm... first of all erm... I never thought of being ashamed of my hands before  and Estella, what coarse hands he has. And thick boots. Of course this isn't quite the same for us now because most of us hardly do any labouring work but, I don't know if any of, or someone would remember say Grandparents, who had labourers hands and they are, different to what we have got you know big, meaty, broken sometimes scarred I remember my grandmother who was the char lady, but when she started work at 14 she worked in Lever's factory in Port Sunlight as a soap wrapper, wrapping paper and her hands were covered in scars from paper cuts that she had got between the ages of 14 and 27. I mean they must have been like shreds, and they would get fined if blood got on the paper.  ((laughs)) fined.  You know but that was, those hands were like that for the rest of her life.  My grandfather who had been a gardener, big... calloused, knobbly they are not like...  hold them up, go on let's see..they are not, we are all softies.

Maureen:	Our children are going to have big long thumbs aren't they soon ((laughs))

Jane:	Yes for texting.  Erm... so poor old Pip never thought of being ashamed of his hands before, but now I began to consider them a very indifferent pair.  Her contempt for me was so strong that it became infectious, and I caught it.  And that's in a few minutes, that's within one game of cards.  Erm... what do you think about the little moment there when Miss Havisham asks him to speak in her ear.  Tell me in my ear said Miss Havisham bending down.  And he does respond to that.  What is she up to?

Angela:	she doesn't mean him well does she, when he says something about he thinks he heard her say, 

Jane:	Oh yes, well you can break his heart.  

Angela:	She is playing with him isn't she, she is toying with him.

Jane:	I was going to say if it was now, if a child reported this to you now, that something like this had happened or I know we know it very well because we know the story or we have seen the film, but actually what, what Dickens is making us experience in those little moments. You say nothing of her remarked Miss Havisham to me as she looked on, she said many hard things of you but you say nothing of her.  What do you think of her?  Deeply...

Catherine:	She is almost reeling him in.

Jane:	Yes, yes.  

Catherine:	Because I think in some respects she has quiet admiration it's the fact that he said earlier on I feel sorry for you, and many people wouldn't... [59.39] to say that to Miss Havisham.   

Jane:	Yes they seem to have a very... interesting straight talking  erm... certainly from his part and it's as if she has responded now by, by tell me in my ear as if we are in this together aren't we I guess.  I can talk to you or you can talk to me.  Anything else. I think she is very pretty... Anything else, and that is as you say partly wheeling him in its, come on say, there is a  particular thing she is almost trying to pull out of him, I think she is very insulting.

John:	Mm. Yes it does feel manipulative doesn't it and he recognises that which is one of the reasons why he holds back.

Jane:	Yes I think I should like to go home.

Catherine:	Yes.

John:	Yes. 

Jane:	And never see her again though she is so pretty.  You should go soon said Miss Havisham, play the game out.   Would anybody else like to read for a while?

Catherine:	Shall I...

Jane:	Thank you yes.

Catherine:	I played the game to an end with Estella and she beggared me she threw the cards down on the table, when she had won them all, as if she despised them for having been won of me.  When shall I have a you here again said Miss Havisham.  Let me think I was beginning to remind her that today was Wednesday when she checked me with her former inpatient movement of the fingers of her right hand. There, there, I know nothing of the days of the weeks, I know nothing of the weeks of the year,  come again after 6 days. You hear? Yes ma'am. Estella take him down.  Let him have something to eat, and let him roam and look about him while he eats.  Go Pip.  I followed the candle down as I had followed the candle up and she stood it in the place where we had found it, until she opened the side entrance. I had fancied without thinking about it, that it must be necessarily night time the rush of the day light quite confounded me and made me feel as if I had been in the candle light of the strange room many hours.  You are to wait here, you boy, said Estella and disappeared and closed the door.  I took the opportunity of being alone in the court yard to look at my coarse hands, and my common boots. My opinion of those accessories were not favourable. They had never troubled me before, but they troubled me now, as vulgar appendages.  I determined to ask Joe why he had taught me to call those picture cards Jacks which ought to be called knaves. I wish Joe had been rather more genteelly brought up and then I should have been so too.  She came back with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer, she put the mug down on the stones of the yard and gave me the bread and meat without looking at me. As innocently as if I were a dog in disgrace.  I was so humiliated, hurt and spurned, offended, angry, sorry, I could not hit upon the right name for the smart, God knows what it's name was that tears started to my eyes. The moment they sprang there, the girl looked at me, with quick delight in having been the cause of them, this gave me power to keep them back and to look at her, so, she gave a contentious toss but with a sense I thought, of having made too sure that I was so wounded, and left.  But, when she had gone I looked about me for a place to hide my face in, and got behind one of the gates in the brewery lane, and leaned my sleeve against the wall there... and leaned my forehead on it and cried.  As I cried, I kicked the wall, and took a hard twist of my hair. So bitter were my feelings and so sharp was the smart, without a name, that she needed counteraction.   

Jane:	Lovely thank you very much.  Were you surprised it was daylight when we came out of that room? It did seem dark didn't it ((laughs)).

Angela:	It reminded me of whenever I come out of the cinema in the daytime I always expect because you have been in the dark for so long, you expect it to be night time.

Jane:	Yes.  Erm... and you are conscious then that's it as if, as with the pictures it's as if you have been in another place haven't you another

Catherine:	world.

Helen:	Yes.

Jane:	world, dimension something.  And this inside Miss Havisham's room is not a part of normal. Erm... so Joe is his brother-in-law as it were who is bringing him up and who is the only person who is kind to him in his life.  Erm... and so he turns on Joe. Erm... I determined to ask Joe why he had ever taught me to call those picture cards Jacks, which ought to be called Knaves.  Erm... do you... do you recognise or remember that feeling of realising that your family or your own personal childhood way of being, wasn't... wasn't  universal.  I suppose if you think back to the first days of primary school, erm... that weird frightening sense of people having different ways of doing things, erm... partly even like I am thinking of things like the way they used to eat their dinner, and all kinds of things erm... but behaviours, and that funny feeling that, that where before you were in a world and it was complete, it was what it was, but then suddenly at school ways of doing things didn't match.  Trying to think of an example, I went to a Catholic primary school and ((laughs)) after we made our first Holy Communion at the age of 7, is anyone else here... was a catholic so you will remember this.  Erm... then we would have communion on Friday mornings, in school and you would have to bring your breakfast to eat after you had been to holy communion, so those people who were taking holy communion would have their breakfast in a little room next to the headmistresses room separately and just to see what other people had for their breakfast one person bought in weetabix spread with butter and jam.  Which I can remember just... ((laughs)) being absolutely completely amazed that there could be such a thing as that. But there were all kinds and some of them had really, really posh breakfasts like coco pops which we only had if my nan came we would have never had that in our family.  And so on, other people brought cold toast which looked horrible erm... those strange changes which seem enormous when you are a child.  So, calling the picture cards Jacks it's not just there being a difference but it is also the feeling of, your family is in the wrong, you don't... they have let you down almost.  Erm... 

Maureen:	You just put me back in mind I remember going on a picnic once, I would probably be about 7 or 8, with some neighbours and  I remember we sat by a river bank and they produced a melon and I don't think I had ever had a yellow honeydew melon before and that kind of... it was that kind of I suppose like bananas after the war, I am too young for that.  But you just put me in... that just brought a memory back, I remember having melon on this river bank thinking this is different ((laughs)), this is nice, and going home and probably saying can we have melon tomorrow.

Jane:	Yes, yes and everyone saying no  ((laughs)) of course we can't.  

Maureen:	We were strictly an orange and apple family.   

Angela:	He is feeling inferior isn't he, and perhaps feeling  [01.09.20 - speaks quietly)

Maureen:	Very much so yes.

Jane:	But also that, it's ok feeling different if you are right to say inferior because if it was just different it wouldn't really matter but it is partly to do with him wanting her to like him isn't it, it's, he does feel inferior but she has made him feel that as you said when her...  whatever it was, was so... her contempt for me was so strong, that it became infectious.  And I caught it.  I don't know whether those feelings of inferior would always be connected to erm... feeling someone was being unkind to you or noticing it, or pointing it out.  I am trying to think of two different examples, one where I felt inferior and it didn't really matter, what would that be like?  Some kind of skill maybe like, never being first in races at school or, those where you just know, everybody knows that Claire Wilson is the one who always wins and you are bound to lose.  No shame attached in a funny sort of way because it's, it is a given. It is just the way reality is.  But somebody following you along saying ha, you can't run, it is as if the pain is to do with the... the way your inferiority fits into the world or not isn't it.

Helen:	Yes and the fact that it's actually pointed out, you know.

Angela:	He has been singled out hasn't he. That is what I am saying if everyone knows that girl is the fastest, you are part of the crowd but to be singled out... 

Jane:	as a rubbish runner.

John:	Yes it's social inferiority isn’t it.  It is not inferiority as you were saying at a particular skill or competence it's deep social inferiority, and he could respond to it by thinking she is a snob, she is a toff but it touches something in him which probably is already there. Or sets...

Jane:	Yes and to do with the fact that actually at home he is a very badly treated child all the time.  Erm... apart from that, that is the sad thing, apart from by Joe who has given him these common habits.  Erm... I wish Joe had been rather more genteelly brought up.  And then I should have been so too.  There is a terrible scene in the book after this when he goes home and says something to Joe like you know Joe why haven't you got better table manners ((laughs)) you think you horrible little snob now.  

Angela:	but that is the part of turning it on himself isn't it, after being infectious, then it is that kind of internalised...

John:	Yes, I mean there are aspects of the encounter which have erm... been attractive to him, he has just seen a world which has been a bit frightening, erm... and a bit nasty but actually...

Maureen:	He likes it.

Jane:	He is attracted to it. Yes, yes and he certainly like Estella and he is, it's as if he is also, he is not even averse to Miss Havisham actually.

John:	No

Jane:	Is he, even though he is quite frightened of her, because of that interlude where she is saying tell me and tell me anything else, and he is responding he is with her.  Erm... that is interesting isn't it.  Erm... so that part where he tries to put into words what he was feeling at the end, middle of page 46, and the paragraph beginning she came back with some bread and meat and little mug of beer, I was so humiliated, hurt, spurned, offended, angry, sorry, I cannot hit upon the right name for the smart. You read this really well and it was, it struck me while you were reading about the dashes in the text, erm... I had sort of forgotten the bit, God knows what it's name was, I knew...  I remembered the sentence, erm... but that there were two lots of dashes in it as if, as if his internal thought is interrupting itself even.

Catherine:	Do you think in that brief moment with Miss Havisham when, the way she is manipulative and saying tell me more, it's almost as if, I don't say an equal but they are on a level and then that happens and then he is, in this passage he has dropped down again. Treated as if he is not even a fellow human being, as if he associates with being an animal.

Jane:	Yes so massively mixed feelings to be on the one hand almost elevated to an equal in conversation by Miss Havisham, adult, erm... etc,  erm... and as Catherine said then suddenly literally almost thrown down, in the yard outside, he is outside the house when she brings him his bread and meat and a little mug of beer.  She put the mug down on the stones of the yard and gave me the bread and meat without looking at me, as insolently as if I were a dog in disgrace. She is behaving worse now that Miss Havisham is not there. She was quite rude and unkind and infectious with her bad feeling when they were in the room but this, it does seem to have notched up now.  I was so humiliated, hurt spurned, offended, angry, sorry... I cannot hit upon the right name for the smart. God knows what its name was that tears started to my eyes.  I am just trying to imagine Dickens writing it and wondering why he wanted that second bit in the dash that says God knows what its name was. Because you could take that away as an editor now, what would be missing? I was so humiliated, hurt, spurned, offended , angry, sorry I cannot hit upon the right name for the smart.  The tears started to my eyes...

Helen:	I think it kind of highlights that he is a child so he doesn't know necessarily what the right word is for it, he is not used to that feeling, he hasn't felt it before.  

Jane:	And he just hasn't got kind of vocabulary you mean?

Helen:	Yes.

Angela	Cranks up the intensity of it isn't it, that only God would know the name, it's so... so out of his experience.

Jane:	Yes, yes.

Angela:	And smart is quite a childlike... it's not  a word I would often use anymore but I can remember saying things smarted, it's almost like pouring salt on the wound it's describing that kind of thing, kind of stinging.

Jane:	A particular pain. Yes, yes it was hail stoning over the weekend, at some point and I was having a lie in and stay in bed late and I was in bed and it was very warm and the hailstones were pelting on the windows and I suddenly remembered walking home or to school when I would be about 5 or 6 and we walked on our own to school, down a long... to the bottom of Neston to St Winifred's primary school, and then being caught in a hail shower, where I started to cry because it was stinging so much on my legs.  Do you remember those feelings just thinking oh childhood does hurt doesn't it, even in... funny silly ways.  Erm... so, 2 reasons then why he might have that God, one it makes it as Angela said almost like more intense in that only God would know what that thing was, erm... but also as Helen says that it might be, to do with his childishness of not having the vocabulary and I don't think just the linguistic vocabulary it's not quite just the word it's almost like...

Helen:	the emotional...

Jane:	Yes. It's like not knowing what that is, yes, what am I feeling.  Not just do I know the word for it. 

Angela:	Even as adults that is difficult because he has named so many feelings hasn't he, hurt, spurned, offended, angry, sorry and even that isn't...

Jane:	they are not enough.  

Angela:	Isn't quite getting to...

Jane:	No

Angela:	and it's so painful that he has to inflict physical pain on himself to... to counteract it.

Jane:	To stand it. And the moment those tears spring into his eyes, the girl looked at me with a quick delight. It's horrible isn't it.  I feel the whole encounter has been leading towards that moment.  This gave me the power to keep them back.  And to look at her and... and I am noticing now that he, he did that before with Miss Havisham when she challenged him or when she, when he was frightened or whatever it was, he did look at her. I hadn't really thought about Pip before but then that makes me think he is quite a... bold boy, some children wouldn't do that if this was... I don't know. I will have to have a think about that, I don't know.  That it would come back to him, now I look back at her, the moment they sprang there the girl looked at me with a quick delight in having been the cause and this gave me the power to keep them back, and to look at her.  So she gave a contemptuous toss but with a sense I thought of having made too sure I was so wounded and left me.  Didn't come off too badly considering how badly hurt he was, he sort of held his own in a way.  

John:	As you were saying it's a confused range of emotions isn't it, erm... including sorrow or sorryness at his own situation.  So it's almost... yes it's almost in line with the judgement that has been made of him.

Helen:	Yes it's like he is not angry at them, he is angry at himself for not being good enough.

John:	Yes, yes but on the other hand there is an edge of that...

Helen:	Yes and he doesn't know whether to kind of defend his place or... just... give in.

Jane:	yes and yet there is something about power in this isn't it, when her delight at his tears gives him power as if I am not going to let you have delight in response to those mixed feelings.  Erm... though she will have gone away thinking yes I think I won that one ((laughs)). It's horrible.  

Angela:	It makes me feel for her though as well because obviously she is a pawn in this, as well.

John:	She is yes.

Angela:	Would such a young girl be so cruel, it's kind of she has sort of inherited that or absorbed that from Miss Havisham.

Jane:	Yes that's right.

Catherine:	And often with Pip,  people can be so angry that they are tearful and they are cross at themselves thinking I am so angry but why am I crying.  

Jane:	I hate that when that happens to me.  It is as if the tears come from one part of you, don't they, sometimes I would say in my family I am not crying, it's just water.  Because it's as if tears would be one bit of emotional life and your anger is something else.  

John:	It's the point where he realises most clearly her motive she has a... she doesn't just... [01.22.13] his cause, she actually delights in hurting him, so kind of motive which as you say strengthens him not to erm... burst out.  

Angela:	Its like he is aware of what she is trying to do and he is not going to let her do it, 

John:	Yes that's right yes.

Angela:	I am not going to let you see that, you...

Jane:	and I wonder if looking back is he like that with Miss Havisham, then. He does keep, given how weird it is and how odd for him as a, a boy from the forge he does hold his own amazingly in that encounter.  Erm... you know that he would, I can't play just now. That is really quite ...

Catherine:	I know to say to such a... a demanding [01.23.07]

Jane:	It really does make me want to read the book again.

John:	In modern parlance he is really cool, throughout the encounter and only in the last 4 lines he just comes to pieces ((laughs)).

Jane:	Yes as I cried I kicked the wall and took a hard twist at my hair, so bitter were my feelings.

Angela:	that is quite often the case isn't it, you have got to hang it together until you get out of it, it's only once you are out of the situation that you can feel, feelings...

Jane:	Yes you can allow it.  Hmm...  it's interesting that one would want... just thinking it's almost like to have those feelings because would it be possible for her to have gone back in and shut the door and then that, he didn't do that, if he didn't do that... what... what would happen to him would he just have the feelings, inside and then, cover them up, but it's as if, that is... in a curious way self expression or something isn't it that where he hurts himself, erm... that needed counter action, it is what we would call in modern parlance self harm,  that is what it is, and one of those things that people can find it extremely difficult to understand or tolerate the idea of yet when we read it there, erm.. lean myself.. my sleeve against the wall, I lean my forehead on it and cried as I cried I kicked the wall which presumably hurts, and took a hard twist at my hair so bitter were my feelings and so sharp was the smart without a name that needed counteraction. Counteraction.  Something to nullify it, to counteract it, erm... it is almost like, could you argue it was like self assertion then in the face of the pain, rather than you could presumably another child could have walked off, hurt and hurting and not... done anything, but would you still have... have the feelings been expressed, or...

John:	Yes if he had stopped at cried it would be totally different finish wouldn't it?

Jane:	Yes, yes.

John:	And I think that last sentence, shows the degree of damage that the event’s caused but also I think it shows erm... his toughness,  so... 

Jane:	Yes in some odd way.  

Angela:	Well it is a kind of saying isn't it, I am not going to give into it, as you said he could have just cried and let it go, let it run its course, but he... he stopped it.  He said I am not going to...  let this win, let this overtake...

John:	and then that sense also of course it's not going to stop there, you get the sense that this is, this is a big one...

Jane:	((laughs)) yes.

John:	this is a downright big event really in a young life, and we are onto... well we are moving now

Jane:	into something

Catherine:	He was determined.

Jane:	Well. There we go that is a little of Great Expectations for you. We will bring this session to an end by reading this poem as well it was long ago... by Eleanor Farjeon.  

	I will tell you shall I, something I remember, something that still means a great deal to me, it was long ago, the dusty road in summer I remember, a mountain, an old house and an old house and a tree, that stood you know behind the house.  An old woman I remember in a red shawl with a grey cat on her knee, humming under a tree.  She seemed the oldest thing I can remember ((laughs)) but then perhaps I was not more than 3 it was long ago. I dragged on the dusty road and I remember how the old woman looked over the fence at me and seemed to know how it felt to be 3, and called out, I remember do you like bilberries and cream for tea. I went under the tree, and while she hummed and the cat purred I remember how she filled a saucer with berries and cream for me, so long ago.  Such berries, and such cream as I remember I had never seen before and never see today you know.  That is almost all I can remember the house, the mountain, the grey cat on her knee, her red shawl, and the tree, and the taste of the berries the feel of the sun I remember and the smell of  everything that used to be so long ago, until the heat on the road outside again I remember, and how the long dusty road seemed to have for me, no end you know.  That is the farthest thing I can remember.  It won't mean much to you, it does to me.  Then I grew up you see.  

	Do you like that one Catherine?

Catherine:	Well I smiled, yes I do but erm... when she made reference to the old lady... 

Jane:	she seemed the oldest thing...

Catherine:	I can remember ((laughs)). She probably wouldn't be very old.  But the kindness of this old lady came through and also what was vivid her cardigan.

Jane:	((laughs)) That is just what we had been talking about earlier. Yes. Her red shawl and the tree and the taste of the berries. But you liked it as well Angela?

Angela:	I did yes I thought it was lovely. And it's in such contrast to Miss Havisham isn't it, this is a very kind old woman which the writer 

Catherine:	Pleasure

Angela:	         remembers because it was such a lovely memory. And I think that they are the things 
	         that I tend to remember, the little kindnesses, I don't remember all that detail, or 
	         equally the cruelty or whenever there has been a slight, they are the bits I remember. 
	         But little kindnesses like that... 

Jane:	It's lovely.  

Catherine:	It is. 

Jane:	And it's good how more and more things come into the memory. It starts out as one thing, I will tell you shall I something I remember, something that still means a great deal to me.  

John:	Yes, it is good isn't it, it's... and it's very simple and you move in to the detailed interaction and then slowly you pull back again and it starts to go slightly out of focus again and it becomes something about smells, something about the past generally, something about her life, or the writer's life er.... then I grew up. Hmm... then I grew up. Yes.  So that's... 

Jane:	So the writer is probably an old person now.

John:	Yes, yes.  

Jane:	Would someone else read that to us so we can get it back in mind again? Would you or if you won't, will you?

John:	yes okay then.

Jane:	Just save you asking other people John as you do sometimes.

John:	sure. 

	I will tell you shall I, something I remember. Something that still means a great deal to me, it was long ago, a dusty road in summer I remember a mountain and an old house, and a tree that stood you know, behind the house. An old woman I remember, in a red shawl, with a grey cat on her knee humming under a tree. She seemed the oldest thing I can remember. But then perhaps I was not more than 3.  It was long ago. I dragged on the dusty road and I remember how that old woman looked over the fence at me and seemed to know how it felt to be 3, and called out, I remember, do you like bilberries and cream for tea. I went under the tree, and while she hummed and the cat purred, I remember how she filled a saucer with berries and cream for me, so long ago. Such berries, and such creams I remember I had never seen before, and never see today you know. And that is almost all I can remember, the house, the mountain, the grey cat on her knee, her red shawl and the tree.  And the taste of the berries, the feel of the sun I remember and the smell of everything that used to be so long ago.  Till the heat on the road outside again I remember, and how the long dusty road seemed to have for me, no end you know, that is the farthest thing I can remember, it won't mean much to you, it does to me, then I grew up you see.

Jane:	The last line is interesting isn't it, the way you read it, was good with a sort of almost like a question nearly at the end of it, dot, dot, dot or something. Erm... as if it explained something and yet you wonder if it... and I am conscious as you were reading that, what you were saying about focussing in and out as if the end gets almost a lot of impressions are happening at the end.  Erm... lines like till the heat on the road outside again I remember, which almost doesn't make sense but it just makes you have a feeling of something doesn't it.  

John:	As if it's a connected memory.  

Jane:	Yes, yes but to what...

John:	You remember one thing, yes, that's right yes.  

Jane:	bit of it firing up other memories.  Also what do you think about the repetition of I remember? Which I just am noticing comes in every single first line of every stanza.  There is something about the rhythm of the poem, doesn't make it seem as regular as that. So it's interesting to look back and see it is utterly regular.   

John:	Yes it gives a sense of the effort I think for me, the effort of remembering and the need to, actually mention the action itself as a, as... an act of memory. I remember that, I remember that, it's quiet though isn't it as you say,  it doesn't actually call attention to itself.  It just constantly works through the poem as a repeated action that has to be made in order to recover these things.

Jane:	that is interesting, isn't it that we have to use that verb in that way.

Helen:	I think it's like she is saying things as they come to mind, so like she says...

John:	Yes

Helen:	and that is almost all I can remember but then she says a load more things after that, so... it's like new things are coming to her memory as she says it.  

Jane:	Yes.  

Angela:	So do you think almost in the act of remembering trying to recall something then more and more detail...

Helen	[talk over] more detail is coming

John:	Yes, yes.  

Angela:	starts to come back and...

Jane:	You wonder if that's partly what happened to Pip in the telling of the interlude with Miss Havisham, as well because it's told as a retrospect, so that he starts it's as if... starting to remember it and imagining imaginary Pip beginning to remember and write it down, the more you go pull the more of those memories come and I think memory does work quite like that doesn't it?  But I am interested in what you say about using the actual verb of I remember, to sort of summon it or, because I think in conversation we often do do that. Oh I remember... I have never noticed that before,  and what the function of that is for us.  The things at the beginning the dusty road, the mountain and old house and tree, that stood you know erm... made me feel the first time I read it that it was almost like a Japanese painting, or something it seemed very simple, and clear and beautiful with no, extra fuss in it, as if it would just be a few lines in a drawing.

Angela:	It's almost like it's a little oasis isn't it on this long dusty road, there is colour and smells and you know... pleasant feelings.

Jane:	and the mountain, is interesting isn't it dusty road, in summer I remember, a mountain, erm... as if that might be if you were walking  or travelling along on a, I don't know what it would be, a horse and cart maybe, how erm... the presence of a mountain when you are walking is so, permanent in the landscape for you. Just thinking if you were a small child and how big that might be, an old and an old house and a tree, and you feel as if each one of us will picture something very specific.  An old woman I remember, in a red shawl, with a grey cat on her knee. And again although it feels almost like a black and white line drawing, there is something so very specific and clean about just saying a red shawl, a grey cat, there is not a lot of detail of anything.

John:	Yes there isn't is there.  No.  It is... it catches at the difficulty of memory, it's a poem about loss in some ways isn't it, the memories...

Jane:	What you can't remember?

John:	that's right. Yes that is right. I mean not in a heavy way but I think the way that it is a conversational poem that starts off with I will tell you shall I, something I remember, and that finish, it won't mean much to you... it does to me. 

Catherine:	Yes that's what I like.

John:	It's a conversation isn't it, she is talking to someone, she may be talking to herself, the writer may be talking to herself. It makes the whole thing work much more poignantly than it would do if it was, if it didn't have those bits in.  

Jane:	It's as if there is a visitor or somebody else there who is just nodding.

John:	that's right.

Jane:	They don't get any words in the poem.

John:	Yes, yes.  ((laughs)) yes.  

Jane:	Such berries and such cream as I remember, I had never seen before, and never see today, you know

Angela:	We often say that don't we?

Jane:	((laughs)) yes. 

Angela:	Strawberries don't taste like they used to.

John:	((laughs)) 

Angela:	and kind of tomatoes don't taste like they used to.  

Jane:	Yes. Can I just ask you to think about the line she seemed the oldest thing I can remember. We need to stop in a minute but because remember is if you like the structural thing of the poem, every time they bring that word back, every time Eleanor brings that word back, she is doing it in a slightly different way and then that is a sentence that line

John:	It is

Jane:	She seemed the oldest thing I can remember.  And it's a sentence that has past, seemed is a past memory or understanding, but I can remember feels present, it's a... present tense isn't it. 

John:	Yes, yes

Jane:	erm... and do you think the meaning of it is... she seemed the oldest thing is it like as if, of all my memories,  she seems the oldest thing in all of them, or erm... at the time when I was a child she seemed the oldest thing.

Maureen:	yes I think so.

Jane:	That is what I...

Angela:	Could be both though couldn't it?

John:	Hmm

Jane:	She seemed the oldest thing almost as if even as the child if we were making it as a film you could have the child thinking then yes, phew she is the oldest thing of anything but quite strongly you are saying could be both.  

Angela:	The oldest thing as in her being but also the earliest memory perhaps, you wouldn’t know anybody that was older but it could be both now you have said it, possibly is both.  

Jane:	You sort of wonder where the other adults were, where were the parents, and are they irrelevant doesn't that matter to this story is it just the feeling of the old lady saying would you like bilberries and cream that is the key,

Catherine:	Yes

Jane:	You know there must be other people there mustn't there, but there is absolutely no sense of them.

John:	That's right, that's right.  A three year old stomping across the [01.43.06] looking for lunch ((laughs))

Jane:	No it wouldn't be right. Well there you are two bits of memory. We need to stop and do the forms now.

John:	Oh the forms.

Jane:	yes so can we have the forms Grace please thank you.

Catherine:	It sounds so nice I wouldn't mind berries and cream.

Jane:	are bilberries the same as blueberries?

John:	I think...

Jane:	I remember bilberries from childhood.  

John:	Yes that's right.

Jane:	We used to go and pick them at Moel Famau and places like that.  Do you think they are?

John:	Yes I think they are the same.  Yes.  

Jane:	I was saying to the other group that when we finish the research part of this I am going to start a reading group, it’ll be the same time on Friday mornings and that I had thought I would quite like to read Great Expectations but since then someone else has mentioned another Dickens novel to me which I thought oh maybe we should read that! So many to choose from if we were going to do one but if any of you would like to do that, erm... it would be good to think about I mean Great Expectations maybe because we have just, we have had that bit, but someone was talking to me about Little Dorrit and I haven't read that for a number of years and it's a... it's a great novel. Don't know if any of you know that? So, well we will see what we decide later.   

John:	but that will start after Christmas would it?

Jane:	Yes because when do we finish?

?	29th

Jane:	29th of November?

John:	November so the 12 sessions.

Jane:	So yes we will start in January, yes.  And in fact I am having a couple of weeks off at the beginning of January so it will be the second half of Jan by the time I come back again.  

Catherine:	the time just goes so quickly.  Well I think it does.

Jane:	Yes.  Do you mean the weeks or the time...

Catherine:	Well both really, the weeks but also the sessions just... they fly past.

Jane:	yes I know.  Can you pass me all of the others. Thank you. I do think the week is terribly fast. Sometimes on a Thursday night I keep thinking it's Friday tomorrow already...  Does this belong to one of you?

John:	Yes, yes.

Helen:	Thank you.

John:	Is it raining.

Catherine:	I am not sure it looks as if it...

John:	A little bit...

Catherine:	You always have to come prepared don't you?

John:	Yes absolutely. 

Catherine:	Yesterday was lovely but you just never know.

John:	they are tiny little recorders aren't they,  they [01.46.58] the technology on that and it's a really good clear recording is it?

Grace:	It is yes. 

[talk together]





