Grace:	in-between the university, The Reader and Merseycare, so...  

David:	No I have to apologise for not turning up.  No I need to apologise for not coming in next week you know what I mean.

Sophie:	You are not coming next week?

David:	No I have only been in once. 

Sophie:	What can you do, life is very unexpected.  How are you feeling.

David:	yes I am alright. I wasn't too bad last week, but you could tell by the way I was talking but I was coughing and I didn't want to sit here and everyone is like listening to me go... 

Sophie:	Well I have not had coughing but I have had... 

Catherine:	Morning, 

David:	just I have only been once, this is only my second time I have been so... 

Sophie:	Don't worry... 

Helen:	I am ok I just had one before.

John:	I won't thank you I have just had a very big breakfast  [01.57] which is rather strong.

Sophie:	Oh do you feel a little bit rattly after it?

John:	Yes I do actually.  

Sophie:	I suffer terribly you know there is like Costa Coffee on Allerton Road,  [02.12] buy Costa Coffee but I find myself getting very busy, and when I have coffee there it's just like... like rocket fuel.

John:	yes

Helen:	I find cafe nero stronger than Costa.

Sophie:	Yes see I can't, I can't touch it.  

John:	You get used to it, we were in Lisbon about 2 months ago and I thought the coffee there was terrific, but I don't normally have strong coffee... but I got used to it, I got used to it, not only at breakfast but around 11 o'clock. So coming back to lower strength coffee was like oh no... cold turkey.

((laughs))

David:	I don't drink coffee.  I went in Costa once, I don't even go in Costa but it was something I did once, and I was going just get me whatever you are having, and he must have got a great big you know those big...  don't know what they are called.



Sophie:	Like the  [03.06]

David:	It was full of coffee and I was like wow it's black as well.  I was like that. 

Helen:	It was Erwin James.

Sophie:	Oh was that today?

Helen:	He mentioned you, 

Catherine:	You were mentioned it was on Radio 4 they were talking about erm... you know... prison and then they mentioned The Reader Organisation.  They said how valuable it is for people from outside of the prison service to be coming in and they mentioned The Reader organisation I thought they will say in a minute we have Sophie Povey. No but it's just interesting how you are more, you are more aware and  you do hear that about The Reader Organisation.

Sophie:	yes

John:	so who did they, did they have anyone on?

Catherine:	No but they mentioned The Reader, how outside agencies are coming in to... you know to prisons how different outside agencies and then they mentioned reading and The Reader Organisation. But I didn't hear all of it because I was doing something and you know when you have the radio on and you suddenly think oh...  It's lovely to have a walk, a nice walk before you start... I think so.

David:	it is in this park because everyone goes morning. Morning, 

John:	Yes that's right.

Catherine:	I think when the weather is nice also...

Sophie:	Well it's nice to be here, Jane is in Denmark did she say.

John:	Oh right of course she is yes.

Catherine:	Well I bumped into Jane on Wednesday and we were saying about the group and how enjoyable and Jane said there is always a tin of biscuits and I said well I am always tempted so Jane said please start, have something so I will today. And they are always left. 

Sophie:	I have got these as well, it's just a little invitation to erm... a session really to kind of thank you for your involvement in the project and I think, you know Graham [05.27] you know talk about some of the things they are looking at and the kind of findings so it's on December 6 which is a Friday I think. At 10 o'clock here with mince pies.

Catherine:	What a nice picture of the Mansion House.

Sophie:	It's lovely isn't it?

Catherine:	Yes

David:	Can't beat snow can you.

John:	That is original snow is it, not just photoshop?

Catherine:	Don't spoil it John, ((laughs)) They have done a very good job.  

Angela:	You are right though everything looks nice with snow on it doesn't it.  

Sophie:	Is Grace normally in the room? 

Angela:	Did you make these Catherine?

Catherine:	No I am afraid I didn't.  

Sophie:	what were you reading last week?

Catherine:	Oh it was Great Expectations.

Sophie:	Ok so as I said we haven't got Maureen today I think her mom is poorly so, she sends her apologies but we are going to read, a section from Jane Eyre today.  And it's on page 247. Ok so it's an extract from Chapter 15 and don't worry if you haven't read it before, I have read it but it was a very long time ago and I can't really remember anything so, we are in it together. And we have got this little bit of information at the start, it just tells us Jane, an unloved orphan grew up in Lowood Institution,  a charity boarding school where she survived hardship and cruelty. Now she has come to Thornfield Hall, as a governess to Adele, the young ward of Mr Rochester.  Rochester's wife is mad.  And unknown to Jane is living locked away in the attic of the house, under the care of an unreliable servant Grace Pool. Despite her plain appearance and modest position, Rochester is intrigued by Jane, and she in turn finds herself becoming more and more drawn to him.  Ok so there you go that is the back story. Shall we dive in?

	And was Mr Rochester now ugly in my eyes. No, reader, gratitude and many associations all pleasurable and genial made his face the object I best liked to see.  His presence in the room, was more cheering than the brightest fire, yet I had not forgotten his faults indeed I could not, for he brought them frequently before me. He was proud, sardonic,  harsh to inferiority of every description.  In my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others.  He was moody too,  unaccountably so, I more than once, when sent to read for him, read to him sorry, found him sitting alone in his library with his head bent on his folded arms, and when he looked up, a morose almost a malignant scowl blackened his features.  But, I believe that his moodiness, his harshness, and his former faults of morality, I say former for now he seemed corrected of them, had their source in some cruel cross of fate.  I believed he was naturally a man of better tendencies, higher principles, and purer taste than such  a circumstances had developed, education instilled or destiny encouraged.  I thought that there were excellent materials in him, though for the present they hung together somewhat spoiled and tangled. I cannot deny that I grieved for his grief, whatever that was and would have given much to assuage it.  Though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid down in bed, I could not sleep for thinking of his look when he paused in the avenue, and told how his destiny had risen up before him and dared him, to be happy at Thornfield.  Why not, I asked myself, what alienates him from the house, will he leave it again soon.  Miss Fairfax said he seldom stayed  here longer than a fortnight at a time, and he has now been resident 8 weeks.  If he does go, the change will be doleful, suppose he should be absent, spring, summer and autumn, how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem.  

	What are you thinking?

Angela:	She has fallen in love with him hasn't she?

Sophie:	And was Mr Rochester now ugly in my eyes. No, reader.  

Catherine:	Well I think that, the last sentence suppose he should be absent spring, summer and autumn, this is telling how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem that is almost, when he is absent she doesn't really get much pleasure out of anything.

Sophie:	Yes joyless.  

Angela:	She sees past all his faults or makes, kind of excuses or reasons for why that should be.

Sophie:	yes shall we look at that bit it's brilliant isn't it. Erm... let's see, was there a particular part that caught your eye Angela?

Angela:	Not particularly, if I go back over it, it's just a sense of that was what was coming...

Sophie:	Yes there is this bit isn't there at the bottom of the first page, yet I had not forgotten his faults, indeed I could not for he brought them frequently before me.  

Angela:	I was a bit concerned about that where she said I believe that his moodiness, his harshness and his former faults of morality, fault would be fault of morality, I said former  for now he seemed correct of them, so does that mean he is not.  

Sophie:	and what is a fault of morality?  

Angela:	that's what I mean it seems kind of morality isn't normally a fault is it?  It's a desirable...

John:	Yes  he is set up as a mystery character isn't he, a strong character with a mystery hanging around him.  And you know, almost kind of connecting up with the idea of a bad thing in that past that we don't know fully about or she doesn't know fully about.

Sophie:	And she says doesn't she there John, in my secret soul. 

John:	yes

Sophie:	These funny kind of... hidden parts.   He was moody too.  But I believe that his moodiness, his harshness, and his former faults of morality, I say former for now he seemed corrected of them, had their source in some cruel cross of fate.  I believed he was naturally a man of better tendencies.  

Catherine:	As high praise I thought they were excellent materials in him, though for the present they hung together, somewhat spoiled and tangled.

Sophie:	Excellent materials.  I saw you smile actually when we read that part. 

Catherine:	That's good. Although the paragraph starts, begins about him being moody, and morose and scowl blackened his features, at the end of the paragraph these excellent materials in him are coming through. But at the present they hung together.

Sophie:	Hung together spoiled and tangled.  And interesting that those, excellent materials are the things 

Catherine:	heaped in a mangled

Sophie:	Yes they are spoiling it,  do you know anybody like this? ((laughs)) I shouldn't say this particularly when there are various recording devices around but it makes me think, my like my stepdad, is a very... because he kind of got with my mom was I was about, I think I was about 11, and he is like the polar opposite of my dad, quite  a stern chap and I was always quite, quite nervous around him you know and I, I don't know I am interested in thinking about how old Jane might be here, because I  know when I... he is quite, he is a narky man ((laughs)) and it is only as I have gotten older that the idea that somebody could be moody and some of these things that when I was younger I took as being quite bad is, doesn't actually stop him... 

Catherine:	Well when you were younger, when someone is older and have qualities that make up their personality, when you are younger you don't see that, you don't sort of appreciate the age gap, or you think the age gap is enormous, you can't even begin to be thinking on their same level, and perhaps that is how Jane although, also, again at the end of the paragraph she is almost I cannot deny that I grieved for his grief whatever that was.  So she even would grieve although not knowing what is the reason for his grief. So that is quite, I find that quite profound.

Sophie:	Say more Catherine.

Catherine:	well she seen the negative but I don't say to someone they might think the... the character of his personality might not be attractive to someone, but even the negative, she is seeing as a positive if that makes sense, almost thinking well, she... she will grieve for him whatever it is.  

Sophie:	Yes I grieved for his grief.  

Angela:	I feel kind of because we know from the beginning part, that her own life has been very difficult and painful and she has almost kind of seeing that in him she is quite drawn to it.

Sophie:	Now that is interesting.  

Angela:	they both seem to have been pained by something [19.48] I kind of feel I am not sure I guess the sense of it is that he is older than her, and she is probably quite young.

John:	It does seem as if that is the case doesn't it?  

Angela:	She is possibly quite a young woman in her 20s or something and he is somewhat older.  

Sophie:	that I thought there were excellent... sorry John.

John:	No just to say following on, it's that scene which is referred to, earlier in the book I can't remember when he paused in the avenue that seemed to be a big moment. 

Sophie:	Yes shall we look at that.  Erm... so it's that paragraph there isn't it, though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid down in bed, I could not sleep for thinking of his look when he paused in the avenue, and told how his destiny had risen up before him and dared him to be happy at Thornfield.   Why not I asked myself, what alienates him from the house.  Will he leave it again soon.  What are you thinking John?

John:	Well obviously that's a key thing in her head when she is thinking about it, he has almost sort of confessed to, to her that there are some really big problems he has with Thornfield, and that the idea of being happy there is going to be quite a challenge, and she is left thinking of course you know, straight away what is the big problem what alienates him from the house.  

Sophie:	Do you think that, that told how his destiny had risen up and dared him to be happy, do you think he says that to her directly or has that come from the look?

Angela:	Well she says doesn't she, why not I asked myself, so that's it feels like her pondering, even when she goes to bed and tries to sleep she can't stop thinking about him again.

Sophie:	yes.  

John:	It's an awkward, in a sense awkward, in a quite difficult phrase isn't it dared him to be happy. 

Catherine:	yes

John:	Erm... and quite apart from destiny rising up so you have got quite a bit of drama, destiny rises up, and dares him to be happy doesn't it sort of... you try and be happy here, you are going to have some big problems as it were.

Sophie:	It's horrible.

Angela:	It's a conflict isn't it, because clearly he is very wealthy and lives in a huge grand house, so maybe that's the dared him to be... it kind of feels like he is has got lots of material things you might want but, 

Sophie:	On paper... dared him to be happy. Oh it is, it's really... such a tiny, tiny word but it's...  suppose he should be absent spring summer and autumn how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem. 

	Ok shall we go back in. We are just at the bottom of 248.  Would anyone else like to read?

((laughs))

Catherine:	You can start off, this is Jane last week saying John you start...  I don't mind. 

Sophie:	Brilliant, thank you. 

Catherine:	do you want me to start, oh alright no I will.  I need my glasses on.  Right, all the excitement of Mr Rochester. 

	I hardly know whether I had slept or not after this musing at any rate, I started wide awake on hearing a vague murmur, peculiar and lugubrious which sounded I thought just above me. I wished I had kept my candle burning, the night was dreary dark, my spirits were depressed. I rose and sat up in the bed, listening the sound was hushed, I tried again to sleep but my heart beat anxiously, my inward tranquillity was broken, the clock far down in the hall struck 2 just then it seemed  my chamber door was touched, as if fingers had swept the panels, in groping their way along the dark gallery outside.  I said who is there, nothing answered I was chilled with fear, all at once I remembered that it might be Pilot who when the kitchen door chanced to be left open, not unfrequently found his way up to the threshold of Mr Rochester's chamber. I had seen him lying there myself in the mornings.  The idea calmed me somewhat, I lay down, silence composes the nerves and as an unbroken hush now laid again over the whole house, through the whole house I began to feel the return of slumber. But it was not fated that I should sleep that night.  A dream had scarcely approached my ear when it fled affrighted scared by a marrow freezing incident enough.  This was a demonic laugh, low suppressed and deep uttered, as it seemed at the very keyhole of my chamber door.  The head of my bed was near the door, I thought at first goblin laughter stood at my bedside or rather crouched by my pillow, but I rose, looked around and could see nothing. As I stood gazed, the unnatural sound was reiterated I knew it came from behind the panels. My first impulse was to rise and fascinate the bolt, my next again to cry out, who is there.  Something gurgled and moaned, [26.33] long steps retreated up the gallery towards the third story staircase. A door lately had been made to shut on that staircase I heard it open and close, and all was still was that Grace Pool and is she possessed with the devil, thought I. Impossible now to remain longer by myself I must go to see Mrs Fairfax, I hurried on my frock and shawl, I withdrew the bolt and opened the door with a trembling hand, there was a candle burning just outside and on the landing in the gallery I was surprised that this circumstance but still more was I amazed to see the air quite dim, as if filled with smoke and... while looking to the right hand and left, to find whence these blue wreaths issued I became further aware of a strong smell of burning.  Something creaked it was a door ajar, and that door was Mr Rochester's and the smoke rushed in a cloud from thence, I thought no more of Mrs Fairfax, I thought no more of Grace Pool or the laugh in an instant I was within the chamber.  Tongues of flames dotted round the bed, the curtains were on fire, in the midst of blaze and vapour Mr Rochester lay stretched motionless in deep sleep.  Wake, wake I cried. I shook him but he only murmured and turned.  The smoke had stupefied him, not a moment could be lost.  The very sheets were kindling.  I rushed to his basin, fortunately one was wide and the other deep and both were filled of water, I heaved them up delged the bed, and it's occupant, flew back to my own room, brought my own water jug baptised the couch afresh and by God's aid succeeded in extinguishing the flames which were devouring it.  The hiss of the quenched element the breakage of pitcher which I had flung from my hand when I had emptied it, and above all the splash of the shower bath I have liberally bestowed roused Mr Rochester at least. Though it was now dark I knew he was awake because I heard him fumigating strange anthemas of finding our self lying in a pool of water. Is there a flood he cried.  No, Sir, I answered. But there has been a fire, get up, do you are not quenched now, I will fetch you a candle.  In the names of all eaves and Christendom is that Jane Eyre he demanded. What have you done with me.  Witch, soress,  who... in the room beside you have you plotted to drown me.  I will fetch the candle sir, and in heaven's name get up, somebody has plotted something you cannot too soon find out and what it is.  There, I am up now, but at your peril you fetch a candle yet wait 2 minutes, till I get into some dry garments, and if any dry there be.  Yes, here is my dressing gown now run.  I did run, I brought the candle which still remained in the gallery, he took it from my hand, held it up and surveyed the bed, all blackened and scorched, the sheets drenched, the carpet round and swimming in water, what is it, and who did it he asked. I briefly related to him what had transpired, the strange laugh I had heard in the gallery, the step ascending to the third storeroom, the smoke, the smell of fire which had conducted me to his room, in what state I found the matters there and how I had delged him with water all that I could lay my hands on.

Sophie:	Thanks Catherine that was brilliant.  There was a demonic laugh. 

Catherine:	That’s very

Sophie:	Low, suppressed and deep, uttered as it seemed at the very keyhole of my chamber door.  

Catherine:	Quite frightening.   

Sophie:	The head of my bed was near the door, and I thought at first the goblin laughter stood at my bedside or rather crouched by my pillow.

Angela:	It does feel really scary... that language the demonic goblins [31.45] and she said was it Grace Pool and is she possessed with the devil so there is lots of kind of scary, evil images there.  

Sophie:	It is horrible isn't it? Impossible now to remain longer by myself. 

Catherine:	And always in these huge houses and almost the noise echoes doesn't it, although she felt as if it was very close. And goblins do crouch down,   on the pictures, not that I have  [32.26] horrible face.  

Angela:	she said its inside the walls, all these scary images. 

Sophie:	Yes, 

Angela:	and candlelight always throws shadows.

Catherine:	they do.

Angela:	That's kind of eerie as well isn't it? It's a big, old dark house.  

Sophie:	but isn't it interesting before... what is going on because before she hears the laugh we have got this part, I wished I had kept my  candle burning the night was drearily dark, my spirits were depressed.  I rose and sat up in bed listening.  

John:	Yes it starts slowly to set up the sort of erm... erm... the background for a supernatural event doesn't it even while things are still ok, the night is not just dark it's drearily dark, spirits are depressed, sound is hushed, there is anxiety around, and nothing has happened yet ((laughs)).

Sophie:	Yes that's right.  

John:	and she is chilled with the fear at the very first noise.  So it's kind of interesting how you are drawn into a situation and even at the early stages, a situation that looks erm... a very frightening one.

Catherine:	You see it's changed dramatically because Jane has gone to bed excited, and you might think I know when I was younger, if you have gone to bed excited because you have gone out with somebody, and you think about them so Jane has gone to bed feeling excited, and now it's all... it's all ...

Sophie:	What sort of excitement is it? Because I mean we have got this suppose he should be absent but how joyless... because there is that energy there...

Catherine:	It is, it is.  And that has dramatically changed as John has said almost building up that, in a space of a short period of time.  Erm... and now you hear this, this laughter and it's... eerie it's,  

Sophie:	and she hears the vague murmur first doesn't she?

John:	Yes no I think that's right.  And then even describing the way in which her chamber door seemed to have been touched it develops as if fingers had swept the panels in groping away around the door, even the early descriptions straight out there into horror land ((laughs))

Sophie:	Yes it's very vivid isn't it?

Angela:	Its all about supernatural stuff isn't it, at that point it could be her imagination, 

John:	Yes,

Angela:	the creaks and bumps in the night and at one point she says I remember it might be Pilot, which I assume is a cat that comes up when the kitchen door is opened, and I am like that you hear a bump in the night because I have got a cat, I think oh well it's the cat, you know I don't have to think any further because I know the cats... 

Catherine:	So Jane sort of rationalises thinking well it might be...

Angela:	Well she is, she is trying to reassure herself and up to that point it could be imagination.  But then it becomes very real doesn't it, it isn't ...

Sophie:	I don't know about you but I was really surprised by that, silence composes the nerves.  

Helen:	Yes I would have thought that if it was really quiet then you would get more nervous because you are listening out for something.

Sophie:	yes and it's heightened.  And... 

John:	Yes it is interesting the way it sets up a shock, a threat, an atmosphere of fear, and then as you say it drops it back again, and so reading it you think oh yes, ok... and then it goes back so the next time, erm... the fear builds up it seems stronger because it has been a kind of false calm really hasn't it?

Sophie:	Yes

John:	the idea calmed me somewhat, 

Sophie:	And you have got this funny fated coming back in haven't we, but it was not fated that I should sleep that night.  How do you feel, what do you think Jane thinks about fate? We have got that line earlier about daring, daring happiness, destiny... 

Helen:	It's like it's showing what's on her mind at the moment, like she is thinking about Mr Rochester's destiny and maybe her density whether it's with him or not, so then that the kind of idea that she is not fated just to go to sleep that night,  is almost showing her mindset at the time. 

Sophie:	Yes that is fantastic, Helen.  Yes that there is this other, 

Helen:	Like she is already thinking about is this night going to change my destiny.

Sophie:	yes.  And that is fascinating I mean how often do you have those thoughts.  Dream had scarcely approached my ear, when it fled affrighted, so and what about poor, erm... poor Mr Rochester, wake up with a bang.

Catherine:	yes

Sophie:	Something creaked, it was a door ajar and that door was Mr Rochester's and the smoke rushed in a cloud from thence. I thought no more of Mrs Fairfax, I thought no more of Grace Pool.

Catherine:	No. It's almost panic.  

Sophie:	when you read that bit you read it, it picked the pace up fast did you notice? It's brilliant. Did you feel that when you were reading it Catherine?

Catherine:	well I think you do because of the way it has been written but that is all Jane could think isn't it, she just discarded erm... Grace Pool and Mrs Fairfax.

John:	And there is a lot happens isn't there.

Catherine:	Yes a lot.

John:	you move from erm... a passive situation which what is described is all what is happening in the head, and sounds, into a real stream of action, 

Catherine:	((laughs)) yes it is.  

John:	It's like a sort of dark farce element to it isn't there, dashing around throwing water everywhere... fires... ((laughs))

Sophie:	yes, is there a flood ((laughs)). 

Angela:	He wakes up angry, suspicious and there is more of that kind of supernatural of all the elves in Christendom is that Jane Eyre what have you done with me witch, sorceress...

Sophie:	why? Why is that his response?  

Angela:	Who is in the room beside you, have you plotted to drown me.  

Sophie:	I had not spotted that who was in the room beside you, who is in the room beside him?  

Angela:	someone has been in the room, is that person still in the room hiding somewhere.   Maybe I guess it suggests maybe something... things like this have happened before. 

Sophie:	Who is the room, what have you done with me witch, sorceress.  Who is in the room beside you, have you plotted to drown me. What kind of a man is he?  

Catherine:	It's almost as if he is dismissive when it's Jane Eyre, oh it is you.  It's erm... 

Sophie:	Where is that Catherine? In a sort of tone?

Catherine:	Yes. 

Sophie:	Is that Jane Eyre.  What have you done. It is definitely not, doesn't feel warm does it and then Jane’s response.

Catherine:	No not at all.

Sophie:	... I will fetch you a candle sir.   In heaven's name get up. I don't know about you but if somebody called me a witch I would probably ...

[talk over]

Sophie:	((laughs)) I will fetch you a candle sir, in heaven's name get up.  

Catherine:	He is very  much Master in that way the way he is, his language to Jane is, as you would say you would throw the water over him and say get on with it ((laughs)) but it's very much, and then... 

John:	Yes

Catherine:	Jane almost is quite submissive even though with all the activity in the house, Jane is thinking about his safety?

John:	Yes that's interesting, that first exchange erm... she is being very practical about it, it's an emergency, there is a fire, get up, you are quenched now I will fetch you a candle, but he comes up with something else, you know elves and Christendom, what have you done with me witch, sorceress, he is in a different universe actually isn't he. He is almost a frightening as the fire ((laughs))

Helen:	I mean I guess at that time, waking up with some woman in his room would be really weird wouldn't it and if he woke up covered in water with some random woman in his room then he would be even more confused.

Sophie:	Yes, and he has just woken up, yes... yes

John:	but he is into accusations of a heavy kind isn't he, erm... it's not saying oh what's the matter, what are you doing, it's much heavier than that, you have got elves in Christendom, to get us started and then witch and sorceress so he is actually accusing her...

Catherine:	and she tried to save him.

Sophie:	It is awful.  But at your peril you fetch a candle yet.  I am certainly finding it tricky to see those excellent materials...

Catherine:	Yes. You see it has changed completely from, yes.  Although...

John:	and she is still very practical, wait 2 minutes while I get some dry garments. Yes here is my dressing gown now run, you know erm... he is saying get off and go and do it.  By there that statement there, erm... he is starting to pull back into something like, sense, recognition of what has happened and... a return to a normal level of response to it, which is still an emergency he gets more practical doesn't he.

Sophie:	Yes.  

John:	he wants dry garments, and ... he wants light.  

Sophie:	Have you ever had that you know when something goes ((clicks fingers)) badly wrong, or...

John:	and he doesn't want a candle because there is still fire risk problems so he is getting very practical himself isn't he?

Sophie:	Oh at your peril you fetch a candle yet.  There is that funny bit where it is very practical and you know... panic.  This is again, probably shouldn't voice this in public but I when I was about 11 we moved into a house and it is when we moved into Liverpool and I got hit by a car, I was playing out in the road, and it all happened very, very quickly I was playing a game where... Manhunt and the kind of den was the house in front and I was hid behind a stationary car you know a wheel, so if your friend looked under he couldn't see... and I kind of legged it out, a car had gone past and I... but there were two and the second one hit me, and it was going quite slowly it was like, hurt my arm, hurt my head but, I remember vividly being in the house, and like the poor chap who hit me in the car came and he was mortified, and everyone was all... and like I got obsessed with the idea that I had dropped my hairband, my hairband that sort of funny...  get some dry garments if they are dry, it would be like that strange kind of fixation on the... such a tiny... I don't know if you...

Catherine:	that was important to you at that time.  And although there were far more important things that is what you focussed on.  

Sophie:	I did run I brought the candle which still remained in the gallery.  What is it and who did it he asked.  Ok shall we go, the top of page... 252 aren't we?  He listened very gravely, his face as I went on expressed more concern than astonishment.  He did not immediately speak when I concluded, shall I call Mrs Fairfax I asked.  Mrs Fairfax? No, what the deuce would you call her for. What can she do?  Let her sleep unmolested.  Then I will fetch Leah and wake John and his wife, not at all just be still, you have a shawl on. If you are not warm enough you may take my cloak yonder, wrap it about you and sit down in the armchair, there I will put it on.  Now place your feet on the stool, to keep them out of the wet, I am going to leave you a few minutes, I shall take the candle, remain where you are until I return, be still as a mouse. I must pay a visit to the second storey, don't move, remember or call anyone.  He went.  I watched the light withdrawal, he passed up the gallery very softly, and closed the staircase door with as little noise as possible.  Shut it after him, and the last ray vanished.  I was left in total darkness.  I listened for some noise, but heard nothing. A very long time lapsed I grew weary, it was cold in spite of the cloak, and then I did not see the use of staying, as I was not to rouse the house. I was on the point of risking Mr Rochester's displeasure by disobeying his orders, when a light once more gleamed dimly on the gallery wall, and I heard his unshod feet treading the matting.  I hope it is he thought I, and not something worse.  He re-entered pale, and very gloomy, I have found it all out said he, setting his candle down on the wash stand. It is as I thought.  

	Would anyone else like to carry on reading?

?	John...

((laughs))

	Revenge is here.... revenge is sweet.

John:	Ok, yes. Is it 253?
	
Sophie:	Do you want to read that last he re-entered from there...

John:	He re-entered pale and very gloomy, I have found it all out said he, setting his candle down on the washstand, it is as I thought.  How sir, he made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking on the ground.  At the end of a few minutes he enquired in rather a peculiar tone, I forget whether you said you saw anything when you opened your chamber door.  No sir, only the candle stick on the ground.  You heard an odd laugh? You have heard that laugh before I should think or something like it.  Yes, sir there is a woman who sews here called Grace Pool she laughs in that way.  She is a singular person.  Just so, Grace Pool, you have guessed it, she is as you say singular, very. Well I shall reflect on the subject meantime I am glad that you are the only person besides myself acquainted with the precise details of tonight's incident, you are no talking fool, say nothing about it, I will account for this state of affairs, pointing to the bed, and now return to your own room, I shall do very well on the sofa in the library for the rest of the night. It is near 4 in 2 hours the servants will be up.  Good night then sir, said I departing. He seemed surprised, very inconsistently so as he had just told me to go.  What, he exclaimed are you quitting me already and in that way you said I might go sir, but not without leave taking, not without  word or two of acknowledgment and goodwill not in short in that brief dry fashion, why you have saved my life. Snatched me from a horrible and excruciating death and you walk past me as if we were mutual strangers at least shake hands.  He held out his hand, I gave him mine, he took it first in one, and then in both of his own, you have saved my life, I have a pleasure in owing you so immense a debt, I cannot say more.  Nothing else that has been would have been tolerable to me, in the character of credit for such an obligation.  But you, it is different. I feel your benefit is no burden Jane, he paused, gazed at me words almost visibly tremble on his lips, but his voice was checked, good night again sir, there is no debt, benefit, burden, obligation in the case.  I knew he continued you would do me good in some way at some time, I saw it in your eyes when I first beheld you, their expression and smile did not again he stopped, did not he proceeded hastily strike delight to my very inner most heart so for nothing. People  talk of natural sympathies, I have heard of good genie there are grounds of truth in the wildest fable, my cherished preserver, good night. Strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look, I am glad I happened to be awake I said, and then I was going. What, you will go, I am cold sir.  Cold, yes and standing in a pool, go then Jane, go... but he still retained my hand, and I could not free it, I bethought myself of an expedient. And I think I hear Mrs Fax... Fairfax move said I, well leave me he relaxed his fingers, and I was gone.  I regained my couch but never thought of sleep, till morning dawned I was tossed on a buoyant but unquiet sea where billows of trouble rolled under surges of joy, I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters ashore, sweet at the hills of Beulah, and now and then a freshening gale, wakened by hope bore my spirit triumphantly towards the bourne but I could not reach it, even in fancy a counter-acting breeze blew off land and continually drove me back. Too feverish to rest, I rose as soon as day dawned.

	Well he keeps on being pretty weird doesn't he?

((laughs))

Catherine:	Yes. 

Angela:	I thought that what turn I didn't see that coming at all.  

Sophie:	starting from where Angela where was the first bit where you felt...

Angela:	when he says good night go, she just goes to go and then it is really quite startling... 

Catherine:	It is.

Sophie:	What are you quitting me already. 

Catherine:	yes. In that way. Not without a word or two of acknowledgement and good will.  

Sophie:	What do you feel is in his head at that moment?

David:	He is being nice because he doesn't want to admit what has happened does he? That is why he is changed.  He has gone up to find out who done it, come back and said, well you heard someone, so...

Sophie:	So he is looking after his, like protecting somebody else?

David:	He is looking after himself. He knows what has gone on.  

John:	Yes, that is right, the Grace Pool thing is just convenient isn't it? 

David:	He has completely turned from being like an ogre... to being Mr nice...

Sophie:	so  do you feel a bit suspicious of him?

David:	hmm

Sophie:	yes sir there is a woman who sews here called Grace Pool she laughs in that way.  She is a singular person.  What?  

David:	he asked her for the answer hasn't he? He has gone out for the answer, come back you heard someone laugh, who was it that laughed.  

Sophie:	Just so Grace Pool you have guessed it. She is as you say singular. Singular, why is this... why?   I have never said that.  What does that mean?  She is a singular person.  

Angela:	She is kind of peculiar or strange quite individual, sort of odd.  

Sophie:	She is a singular person just so, Grace Pool you have guessed it she is as you say, singular.  

Catherine:	Very labouring the point.  And before then when he, when Mr Rochester left the room, as you said Dave, he is controlling, he is instructing Jane, you remain where you are until I return, be as still as a mouse.  Don't move remember or call anyone. 

David:	that is not protecting her is it, that is making her worse, that's taking away [59.42]

Angela:	but there is caring in there as well isn't there, when he says put the blanket round you take my cloak, put your feet up so your feet aren't... that's the kind of first time I felt like he kind of cared.

Sophie:	Yes and he puts it around her doesn't he.  There I will put it on.  

Catherine:	Because he knows what is... what is happening.  Jane is innocent and naive to that.  

Sophie:	she is as you say singular that word keeps catching my eye.  

Helen:	I think neither of them actually know what they are implying by saying that she is a singular person, like Jane seems to kind of say it as if she is being diplomatic, you know saying she is a singular person as if she is not quite sure what to imply and then he says yes, yes you are right you know, but neither of them quite actually know what they are saying.  

Sophie:	Right that is fascinating.  

Angela:	It's like saying somebody is a character isn't it, when it's like you don't really want to say actually I think you are really odd, it's saying you are unique and individual...

Sophie:	his response well I shall reflect on the subject, yes there is definitely a grappling with something there, something unsaid.  And...  this singular I think like one, isn't it, like she is one person. Seems a strange thing to describe.   But yes, there she is left in total darkness, and listening for some noise but heard nothing.. What is she feeling there? A very long time elapsed.  

Catherine:	it was longer than she thought, I grew weary, it was cold, and then she was almost contemplating leaving the room, I was on the point of risking Mr Rochester's displeasure by disobeying his orders, when the light once more gleamed.   I think this is very good, I heard his unshod feet treading on the matting, I hope it is he, thought I.  

Sophie:	And not something worse.  I have found it all out said he, it is as I thought. Were there any other parts that caught you while we were reading it?

John:	The formality of his language, erm... comes as a bit of a surprise he seems to, as it were warm up 

((laughs))

	And then he moves into statements that seem to be the kind of, that someone would make on the Chair of a company, I have pleasure in owing you immense a debt I cannot say more, nothing else that has being would have been tolerable to me in the character of creditor for such an obligation.

Sophie:	Yes.

John:	It's not at all warm is it, it's... it's erm... very erm... distant, kind of language.  

Sophie:	but you it is different.  

John:	then he warms back again as it were from I knew, strike delight to my very inmost heart so for nothing.  So... 

Sophie:	What do you think how will Jane be feeling here? How would you feel? 

Catherine:	Confused and bothered. ((laughs))

Sophie:	Yes

David:	Just give me a sign 

Sophie:	Yes ((laughs)).  Treat them mean and keep them keen.  ((laughs))

Catherine:	There is a sign there David.

Angela:	It is confusing isn't it, it's kind of what she wants but then just bewildering because she says later on doesn't she, I was tossed on buoyant but unquiet... where billows of trouble rolled under surges of joy.  

John:	it's that mixture of distance and closeness she... yes 

David:	Keep her sweet all the time isn't it?

John:	She is picking up the erm... disturbing aspect of that you know how do we react here, oh...

Sophie:	that is beautiful John.

Catherine:	It is.  

Angela:	Sometimes the language doesn't match does it,  She has a very quick(?) way of saying things yet he won't let go of her hand and is gazing at her.  

Sophie:	Yes,

John:	Strange energy in his voice and strange fire in his look,  she is erm... putting an interpretation on that isn't it, I mean that fits in with the way he is speaking. It is fitting in with what he says that it should be with strange energy and fire in his look.

Angela:	It's very intense isn't it?

Sophie:	it is.  Go then Jane, go but still he retained my hand I could not free it.  

Angela:	She wants to get away from him in the end doesn't she, she really needs to get away from ...

Catherine:	The exclamation mark by erm... when Jane is saying to Mr Rochester that she was going, what! you will go. 

Sophie:	You will go.  Why is he surprised, what does he want to do?

John:	Yes it is odd isn't it.  

Sophie:	Can we look at that last paragraph, would anyone like to read it a second time?

Catherine:	where would you like me to start?

Sophie:	I regained my couch.

Catherine:	Would you like me to read it?

Sophie:	Thank you.

Catherine:	I regained my couch but never thought of sleep. Till morning dawned I was tossed on a buoyant but unquiet sea, where billows of troubled rolled under surges of joy, I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters a shore, sweet as the hills of Beulah. And now and then a freshening gale, wakened by hope bore my spirit triumphantly towards the bourne, but I could not reach it, even in fancy a counter-acting breeze, blew off land and continually drove me back, too feverish to rest, I rose as soon as day dawned.  

	I mean all the description in this paragraph is erm... each word is very powerful I think, but I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters a shore sweet and then later and now then and then a freshening gale wakened by hope... bore my spirit triumphantly.  But I could not reach it.  It is almost as if Jane feels she is almost within touching distance and then... it's very, very...

John:	It is a mix of positives and negatives all the way through isn't it? Buoyant erm... but unquiet joy, trouble, erm... wild waters, sweet hills, freshening gales...

Catherine:	It's white water rafting ((laughs))

Sophie:	All these pulls and...

John:	Yes, yes.  

Sophie:	That shore keeps catching my eye as well does anyone... is anyone else finding that?  I mean what would the shore be?  

Catherine:	well I suppose she would think there was no turbulence, there would be no movement, it would be more, I wouldn't say restful,  but...

David:	It's peaceful isn't it?

Catherine:	But this is turbulent it's a mix of emotions isn't it?  

David:	Because you are looking beyond the waters, or she is looking beyond the waters to where she wants to get to. 

Sophie:	and where do you think that is?

David:	It's only where it says, I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters, a shore.

Sophie:	Yes.

David:	She is looking for, as you say Catherine for comfort, that comfort part of it. Settling... 

Sophie:	yes, settled. 

David:	I think that's what it...

Catherine:	And yet I could not reach it.  

Angela:	So is the shore to be with him?

John:	I think that's right, absolutely and that's the... harbour the bourne, bore my spirits triumphantly towards the bourne I think that sense of erm... a good relationship, but a long way away.  

David:	Because it's got hope further down the passage in it as well, further down the sentence.

John:	yes that's right.  

Sophie:	Do you recognise that feeling? 

Catherine:	Oh yes.  ((laughs)) Oh yes.  That is how I could relate to the other time when you go to bed excited and then you have this.  

Angela:	There are lots of the things that relate strongly about falling in love... bitter sweet and it’s...

John:	((laughs)) that's right. 

Angela:	Very kind of turbulent.

Sophie:	Yes

Catherine:	and I have not read [01.10.22]

((laughs))

John:	Can I just excuse myself a minute.

Sophie:	Of course.

David:	We should have a bunch of 16 year olds, yes I know that...

Sophie:	Yes.  So do you think it's something perhaps to do with Jane's age that she is having it this way? 

Angela:	Maybe it is her first love?

David:	That is what I mean is it that like the grown up to the youngster, you know I mean I don't know how you say it, how to explain it, when  you are younger you have infatuation with people, that are older even though you are not going to get there sometimes it's erm... the mystery you know it's, 

Sophie:	And reading into the tiny, the tiny...

David:	the signs that are not there, which she thinks might be there and... 

Angela:	 I was talking to a friend the other week, I don't know how we got onto it, about kind of falling in love and some of these kind of things and I was reminded of there is a Nietzsche quote, a very very bad paraphrasing of it, it's something along the lines of, we fall in love with our design not the designed and that is the kind of thing when you start to say well there is something about you that I love, but I will ignore all the things that are counteracting that ((laughs)) because really it's not that person its what you see in them.  That is how I understand that anyway.  

Sophie:	the excellent materials.  

David:	That's why they get married before they don't even know them or whatever or...

Angela:	And it's that draw of someone who seems bad and broody isn't it?

Catherine:	Yes. Distant.

Angela:	And most girls like a bad boy kind of 

Sophie:	((laughs)) That's a very knowing nod between you two there I won’t make any comment. Too feverish to rest I rose as soon as the day dawned.

David:	But she is saying isn't she but I could not reach it, even in fancy. So... 

Sophie:	Ooh.

Catherine:	That is very good David.

Sophie:	Even in fancy that's, that is great David. Even when she is pretending.

David:	 I mean I don't know whether that is it's just... 

Angela:	It is a big chasm to cross kind of socially as well isn't it because he is, this quite affluent man and she is a governess, so essentially is a servant isn't she, a step up from the house keepers but socially there is a huge gap.

Sophie:	Huge gap.  

Catherine:	and you said David earlier, I feel an infatuation.

David:	That's the word I was looking for, that is the type of phrase I was looking for yes.  

Sophie:	Shall we have a look at the poem that is with it.  I am not sure how you do it with Jane but are you happy for us to read it twice?

David:	Don't ask me...

Sophie:	I certainly need a couple of goes, don't know what you think but I find one go of a poem and it's often straight over...

David:	It's like a story a lot of story goes over my head that is a lot of the time it takes me a while to...

Sophie:	Yes well that's... it's like music isn't it, you might listen to a song and there might just be one line that you think oh...

David:	Sometimes I look as if I am not listening but I am...

Sophie:	No, no

David:	It is going in...

Sophie:	No I can tell ((laughs)). Ok I will read it for the first time then and if somebody would like to read it a second time that would be great. To Anthea who may command him anything.

	Bid me to live, and I will live thy protestant to be.  Or bid me love and I  will give a loving heart to thee.  A heart is soft, a heart is kind, a heart as sound and free as in the whole world that can't find that heart I will give to thee.  Bid that heart stay and it will stay to honour they decree, or bid it languish quite a way, and it shall do for thee.  Bid me to weep, and I will weep while I have eyes to see, and having none- yet I will keep a heart to weep for thee.  Bid me despair, and I will despair under that cypress tree, bid me die, and I will dare even death to die for thee.  Thou aren't my life, my love, my heart, the very eyes of me, and has command of every part to live and die for thee.  

	Shall we hear it a second time?  Anyone fancy it.

David:	I will read it if you want me to. 

Sophie:	Yes. Love you to. 

Catherine:	That's a nice thing, we are all in a group.

David:	Sure, I mean I don't mind reading as I say I will give it a go. 

Sophie:	Thank you that's brilliant.

David:	right, To Anthea who may command him anything.  Bid me to live and I will live, thy Protestant to be.  Or bid me love, and I will give a love heart to thee.  A heart as soft, a heart as kind, a heart as sound and free.  As in the whole world thou can't... can't find, the heart I will give to thee.  Bid thy heart to stay and I will stay, to honour thy decree, or bid it languish quite a way and shall do so for thee.  Bid me to weep and I will weep, while I have eyes to see, and having none yet I will keep a heart to weep for thee.  Bid me despair, and I will despair under that Cypress tree, or bid me die and I will dare, in death to die for thee.  Thou art my life, my love, my heart, the very eyes of me, and has command of every part to live and die for thee. 

Catherine:    Lovely.

David:	Is that ok?

Sophie:	You did something fantastic then. Did anyone spot it?  

David:	Please tell me.

((laughs))

Sophie:	You did something amazing.  In the third that third verse, it says bid that heart stay and it will stay to honour thy decree, did anyone notice what Dave did?  You said and I...

Angela:	Oh yes, he did.

Sophie:	He said I... you said bid that heart to stay, and I will stay... 

David:	Oh did I?

Catherine:	that makes it more personal yes.  

Sophie:	That was beautiful.  

David:	Don't ask me how I done that ((laughs)).

Sophie:	Isn't that interesting.

John:	It does need reading steadily as well, 

Sophie:	yes

John:	I mean we all have different approaches to it, but it's one of those kind of total love commitment things, which erm... to be effective needs to be erm... progressed steadily doesn't it otherwise it just seems completely erm... overwhelmingly and therefore a slightly, more than slightly incredible like oh come on you think ((laughs) is this too much.  Erm...

Sophie:	but by being a bit more measured?

John:	Yes I think so, I think it is a bit more measured that's right yes.  

Angela:	I didn't feel particularly moved by this, there is something quite measured about it. And you are right when you say, when you say I, you are saying I don't know why  I said that, because you were reading it and you said I, that makes it more personal doesn't it because this is kind of externalising the heart... when you say I it's about me isn't it?  This is something I will give you, it's about I will...

Sophie:	But I am the heart.  Were there any particular lines that captured your eye or... 

David:	yes that bit with I in 

Sophie:	((laughs)) you liked that.  

David:	 only messing.  

Sophie:	The first part I don't quite get if I am very frank. Bid me to live and I will live, thy Protestant to be. Or bid me love and I will give a loving heart to thee.  

David:	What is the meaning of the protestantism

[talk together]

David:	Is it religion or... 

John:	A person who stands for something. 

Sophie:	right, but I can't.... relate it immediately to the religious. Who is talking here? How do you picture the person? Is it a man, a woman... I am interested to see how you...

David:	It's a man. The title of it to Anthea.  Or is it?  

Sophie:	yes would make sense. 

Angela:	I thought it was a man talking to a woman.   

Sophie:	I suppose it could be just because I have got Jane in my head but I immediately saw it as a woman but I think you are... the title would definitely suggest otherwise.

David:	It is because you have got like a heart as soft, a heart as kind, a heart as sound and free.  They are feminine qualities aren't they really. That is what I... even though males do that it's more of a feminine quality.

Sophie:	a  heart as kind.  A heart as soft, a heart as kind, a heart as sound and free as in the whole world that canst find, that heart I will give to thee. 

David:	Mind you now you have just said that then, it's something he is giving somebody else...

Sophie:	It could be couldn't it?  

David:	Yes.   

Sophie:	At what kind of point in the relationship do you think they are?  

John:	Well pre-marital ((laughs))

Sophie:	Dare you say more go on.  ((laughs)).  It is interesting.  What made you think that John? ((laughs))

David:	They actually get on.

John:	I mean in that sense it's almost, not knowing much about the period it's a kind of courting poem isn't it, it's a poem of professed love which erm... erm... among other things is strategic you know, I think isn't it, it is...

Helen:	Yes it's almost as if it's asking

John:	Yes that's right yes.  

Helen:	rather than any

Angela:	Well that is the thing isn't it all the time, bid me, ask me, ask me and I will do this for you.  You know I will give up my life, I will live or I will die for you.  

Sophie:	yes.  Who may command, yes...  Shall we read it again... 

	To Anthea who may command him anything.

	Bid me to live and I will live thy protestant to be.  Or bid me love and I will give a loving heart to thee.  A heart is soft, a heart is kind,  a heart is sound and free,  as in the whole world that can't find that heart I will give to thee.  Bid that heart stay and it will stay to honour thy decree, or bid it languish quite away, and it shall do for me.  Bid me to weep and I will weep while I have eyes to see, and having none yet I will keep a heart to weep for thee.  Bid me despair and I will despair under that Cypress tree, or bid me die and I will dare even death to die for thee.   Thou art my life, my love, my heart the very eyes of me, and has command of every part to live and die for thee.  

David:	It may not even be a relationship, might be on his own, that is what he is searching for.  Or she is searching for.  And  who shall do so for thee.  It's like it's... a distant person again, it's... that heart I will give to thee.

Sophie:	Yes

David:	that type of thing, it's always like the third person it's always...

Sophie:	Yes that's great, bid it languish quite away, so that's physically away as well.  I have not seen that, that's great.  Or bid it languish quite away it shall do for thee.  It is it's kind of distancing that somehow isn't it?  

David:	It's like Angela said before... bid, you are bidding for something it is you want something. 

John:	Yes that's right, it's interesting this kind of love poem, are statements of self subjection aren't they, total self subjection there are other kinds of love poem where you  set up of an active relationship with a person who you claim to love but this one is just working with one theme, and you have total command of me.  I am nothing, except as you decide.  That is the theme isn't it which is quietly pursued through each verse.  

Catherine:	Yes because the last verse and has command of every part to live and die for thee.  

Sophie:	and has command.  

John:	It is rather similar to a religious relationship, from that sense isn't it.  It closely follows, say for instance the relationship of a devoted Christian. Without that being a, you know a... a marked point of reference.

David:	because he is saying as well as in the whole world I can't find, canst find that heart I give to thee, so they can't find it.  They can't something that is what they are looking for.

Sophie:	Yes.   And hast command of every part of me. Command.  What is that like power or... 

Angela:	I think so.  It's very submissive isn't it. I will just do whatever you say, I will die for you. 

Sophie:	How would you feel you know if you are Anthea for a moment what are you going to, how... 

John:	 A bit suspicious.  ((laughs)) Delighted and suspicious ((laughs))

Angela:	that's it isn't it, it depends if it is wanted attention, it wasn't until Dave said that is this about somebody people who are together or is it about a longing, protesting that this is what they would do for that person which could be welcome or not ((laughs)) by the other person.  

Sophie:	To Anthea who may command him anything.

David:	Please pick me, please. ((laughs))

Helen:	It is kind of desperate in a way isn't it and that could be seen as a good thing or it could be seen as a slightly scary thing you know it depends how you look at it.  

Sophie:	Yes

John:	It's an extreme statement but it's quietly made as came out, you know David's reading, it is a succession of relatively quiet statements, which you know taken literally are overwhelming but it's not erm... elaborate is it, it doesn't you know, erm... call attention to its language as erm... making elaborate promises.  

Sophie:	Bid me despair...

John:	they are just big promises.  ((laughs))

Sophie:	Bid me despair and I will despair under that Cypress tree.  What is that doing?   

Angela:	That is perhaps the only bit that seems interested and particular about something in it, the  rest of it's a bit erm... that ties it to a place.

Sophie:	Yes.  

David:	It depends what context he know her doesn't it, whether he knows her, walking past, whether he is a friend, whether he is you know, you can twist it and change it, and... 

John:	I think that's right, it's got no reference in it to her beauty, it has no reference in it to her qualities it only has reference to his devotion so in that sense it's... is religious in language isn't it,  so the lines are like a hymn I thought when you were reading it. 

Helen:	I mean without the title it wouldn't actually have to be to anyone in particular it could just be to anyone really.

Sophie:	Yes. That's yes... that is.... sort of devotion.

John:	Thee would then start to become more religious I suppose.

Helen:	Yes you could read it as a totally religious poem, to God or something like that, without the title. 

Sophie:	yes of course. Thou art my life, my love, my heart.

John:	It is interesting that erm... as a kind of, a full blown passionate love poem, it has not one single reference to the quality of the person.

Sophie:	Yes.

David:	When you brought it up actually, it could be anything yes. 

Sophie:	why? I mean how would that change it, if it had...  you know if say that, obviously it wouldn't rhyme, but you know that little bit that you read Dave bid that heart to stay and it will stay, to honour thy... I don't know if that was beauty rather than decree.   How would that change it.

David:	See it more of a worship like, yes it's more of a worship of a... of a being, not as a person.

Sophie:	Yes that's great.

David:	It’s only as I say as John something what you said, I wouldn't have even thought of it.  There is no qualities in her.

Sophie:	So he is the one who has got the physical attributes, and he has got the eyes to weep and the heart but, that is brilliant.  

Catherine:	But I thought it was personal when you read it, David.  

David:	I tried, I tried.

Angela:	It was that second when you said I instead of it, 

David:	Yes

Angela:	It is an object isn't it, I is... my heart is an external thing to... 

Sophie:	Well you can read that to your special someone and blow them away, this evening. 

David:	Every time I read a poem I will have to change something. 

Sophie:	((laughs))

David:	 I didn't even know I done it. 

John:	I mean the focus is, it is very important I think actually the way, to put another sort of frame on it, it is almost, or indeed entirely about him isn't it that is what we were just saying it is entirely about him, the focus is entirely on his state which gives it a kind of a slightly different feel from love poems in which erm... you are referenced regularly to the other who the love is aimed at, we don't get any, any sense of it except a name in the title.  Erm... 

Sophie:	So he has got this really big presence in the poem but still... very vulnerable.

John:	Hmm

Sophie:	Would anyone like to read it a final time before we... before we finish? You will know it off by heart by the end, you won't even need the book.  

	No?

David:	I am tempted to read it again...  only so I can put an I in it.  

Sophie:	((laughs))

David:	that will be a conscious effort to go...

Sophie:	Brilliant.

David:	Do you want me to read it again... here we go again...

	To Anthea who may command him anything.

	Bid me to live and I will live, thy protestant to be.  Or bid me love and I will give a loving heart to thee.  A heart as soft, a heart as kind, a heart as sound and free, as in the whole world thou canst find that hard I will give to thee.  With that heart stay, and It  will stay, to honour they decree,  or bid it languish quite a way and shall do so for thee.  Bid me to weep and I will weep, while I have eyes to see, and having none yet I will keep  a heart to weep for thee.  Bid me despair, and I will despair under that Cypress tree, or bid me die and I will dare in death to die for thee. Thou art my life, my love, my heart, the very eyes of me, and hast command of every part to live and die for thee. 

Catherine:	I like the other version but this was just as

David:	I only wanted to say it because it was...

Catherine:	I closed my eyes for a second cause I wanted to hear, it was good Dave at the end

David:	Do you want me to read it again.  

Catherine:	No the emphasis on when you are reading out different verses.

David:	I can read the verse again with I in it if you want.  Do you want it?

Sophie:	Yes

David:	there you go.  Erm... Bid that heart stay and I will stay, to honour thy decree or bid it languish quite away, and shall do so for thee.  There is my bit...

Sophie:	((laughs)) brilliant, 

Angela:	It sits just as well doesn't it, that is why, the first time when you were saying what was it and I couldn't think but I did notice it the first time he said it but it wasn't jarring at all. 

[talk together]

David:	Never even noticed to be honest.  It wasn't a conscious effort. 

Angela:	Well I don't think it is it, when you read something out you kind of kind of... you kind of thinking ahead or interpreting it yourself but not in an aware way it is out of...

Sophie:	And feeling it before it's...

John:	I think so I mean it's got so much...

Angela:	anticipating what you think might come next.

John:	that's right it's got so much strength in the claims that it doesn’t want too much emphasis in the speaking it just wants a quiet erm... delivery because the words do all the work erm... which yes, yes 

Catherine:	And that's why I closed my eyes for the last verse because it's profound in a way you let it [01.42.07]

David:	I tend not... I mean I prefer when people read slowly, and it's because it becomes just that monotone noise if it's done quick to me.  

John:	I think that works extremely well it's almost as if, I mean you read it extremely well so you get that sense of like, it's like a deadpan... no that is not quite the right word like the deadpan nature of the statement is you know offset by the incredible commitments being made in every verse.  

David:	That's why I struggle sometimes in the sentences because I not used to doing it.  You know what I mean it's...

Sophie:	Well you are a natural. 

David:	I try and get the word as I say I try and do it properly  or justice but I am not used to doing it so...

Angela:	Is doing something justice the same as reading it word for word.

John:	Absolutely.  

Sophie:	I really, really enjoyed that.  I am rather quite jealous that Jane gets the pleasure of your company every week.  

Catherine:	 I enjoy it, we all do it's...  

Angela:	We have talked about continuing...

David:	[01.43.16]...

Angela:	You weren't here last week David but Jane is talking about after Christmas continuing, in January continuing this just as a reading group.

David:	I really enjoy it I mean, I know I sit there when people read and you know when I smile every so often I know you have noticed me laughing or smiling it's not I am laughing at the person reading or it's because I like the way they are reading it, honestly.

Catherine:	That's the nice thing in the group, you can sit and listen and contribute or not if it's...

David:	Because I know I have done it with you before and you noticed I mean I do laugh but it's because of the way people read the characters.  And that is what I enjoy.

Sophie:	but that's good, and you know when we talk about the demoniac laugh in the....

Catherine:	And I particularly like this [01.44.04] and when I am thinking about this poem I will think of you reading it.

David:	Thank you very much.  

John:	Yes that's right I thought it was pretty good.

David:	I done it with Jane last time, sat there and Jane does the same she reads the characters I am sitting here and I am going... I thought I am not laughing at you...

Sophie:	Yes well you know it makes it enjoyable.

David:	I enjoy the way people...

John:	when she was reading that. I think sitting alongside you almost, the Nathaniel Hawthorne story...  which had some funny moments in it, anyway.

David:	But that's what... but when she read it [01.44.42] I thought I am not laughing at you, I am laughing at the story it was... 

Sophie:	Great.  I think have you got forms...

John:	I think I will have one of these biscuits.

Angela:	It has made me want to read the Brontes again.  I caught a bit at the end of that programme it was a repeat of Sheila Hancock about the Brontes, and... it was so moving, so... just incredible the way they all died so close together like 29, 30, one after another. Was it Charlotte who lived the longest but she only lived into her 30s.  Branwell, Jane and Emily all died within 3 months of each other. 

Sophie:	I think I have seen, my friend lives in Scarborough and I saw it is Emily Bronte's grave is in Scarborough?

Angela:	Can't remember.

John:	Emily is where sorry?

Sophie:	In Scarborough.

John:	Yes I think so.

Angela:	[01.45.34] she died... Emily or Jane... bring her back so her grave is there. 

David:	Because I have got...

Angela:	A hugely tragic story worthy of  a Victorian novel of its own.

Sophie:	That's it.

Angela:	Amazing, amazing lives they had.  

Sophie:	do you need a pen?

David:	I am always last anyway so erm... 

Catherine:	The session just goes so quickly.

Angela:	It does doesn't it. This is a little oasis for me I think I am in the Reader group on Wednesdays, quiet and calm go out and do everything else on Friday but there is something terribly civilised about it.

Catherine:	I think I wouldn’t normally walk in the park at quarter -ten, ten to ten but it's lovely.

Angela:	I do when I leave, I am always in a rush to get here, and when I leave I go to there and I look around at the trees it does have an effect on how I look at things.  

Sophie:	Warm now isn't it.

Catherine:	It is... 

Erin:	Just saying it is a bit different from the other group.

Sophie:	Is it freezing in there?

Erin:	Yes, it's kind of like jackets you know.  We saw a beautiful fox out here this morning.  

[talk together]

Catherine:	thank you.  I feel as though I have got a flushed face it's so warm.  

John:	It is yes. 

Catherine:	thank you Sophie.

Sophie:	Thank you, it's great to see you all as well.  

Erin:	Just to say for the first session I know you put a lot of effort into it and a lot of good ideas came out and the idea I know Graham mentioned is that to sit down and maybe have a feedback session with the members of The Reader Organisation, and just to share the ideas, so if you are available on the 6th we would love to see you and to say if you would like yourself to present some of the work, you would be really it is going to be informal, but it's just about being open and sharing, there is no pressure, and but that was the idea of the day to put the canvas and to talk through erm... the work that you did.  

John:	Yes. 

Catherine:	We were saying we liked the photograph...

Erin:	Isn't that nice, that is a beautiful picture. 

Sophie:	It is really lovely isn't it.

Erin:	Yes.  Such a nice photograph.  

Catherine:	you with your artificial snow.

Sophie:	Brilliant.  

[talk over]


